Water and the Environment
Future
Drought
Fund
October 2021
Future Drought Fund 
Annual Report 2020–21

© Commonwealth of Australia 2021
Ownership of intellectual property rights
in this publication is owned by the Commonwealth of Australia (referred to 
as the Commonwealth).
Creative Commons licence
All material in this publication is licensed under a Creative Commons 
Attribution 4.0 International Licence except content supplied by third parties, 
logos and the Commonwealth Coat of Arms.
Inquiries about the licence and any use of this document should be emailed 
Cataloguing data 
This publication (and any material sourced from it) should be attributed as: 
DAWE 2021, Future Drought Fund Annual Report 2020–21, Department of 
Agriculture, Water and the Environment, Canberra, October 2021 CC BY 4.0.
ISBN: 978-1-76003-473-3
This publication is available at awe.gov.au/publications
GPO Box 858 Canberra ACT 2601
Telephone 1800 900 090
Web awe.gov.au
Contact us
Annual report contact officer	
Director, Evaluation and Data,
Drought and Farm Resilience Division 
Contact email 	
droughtresilience@agriculture.gov.au 
Subscription for updates FDF	
www.haveyoursay.awe.gov.au/	
future-drought-fund 
Water and the Environment has exercised due care and skill in preparing and 
compiling the information and data in this publication. Notwithstanding, 
and advisers disclaim all liability, including liability for negligence and 
for any loss, damage, injury, expense or cost incurred by any person as a 
result of accessing, using or relying on any of the information or data in this 
publication to the maximum extent permitted by law.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank interview and survey participants for their input.

iii
Minister’s message
I’m pleased to present the inaugural Future Drought Fund Annual Report covering the 
year 2020–21 – the first year of the fund’s operation.
to provide an investment of $100 million each year from 2020 onwards to build drought 
resilience in regional Australia. And we have got on with the job. 
The Act was passed, a consultative committee was established to consult across 
Australia to develop a 4-year plan and eight foundational programs were announced. 
This report demonstrates the great progress we have made to build strong foundations 
in our first year of work.
	Î
We’ve established 8 Drought Resilience Adoption and Innovation Hubs across 
Australia to drive regionally focused efforts to develop, extend, adopt and 
commercialise drought resilient practices and technologies. With the Hub nodes we 
have over 40 locations to work with farmers and communities across Australia and 
listen to their priorities.
	Î
We’ve worked with state and territory governments to establish tailored programs to 
deliver training to farmers on risk planning, and to develop local led community plans 
to manage drought risks.
	Î
We’ve released the first prototypes of online tools to make climate risk and resilience 
information more accessible and useful for farmers, agricultural businesses and 
communities so they can better understand drought and other climate risks.
	Î
We’ve partnered with the Australian Rural Leadership Foundation and the 
Foundation for Rural and Regional Renewal to establish programs to bolster the role 
community organisations, networks, leaders and mentors play in driving action to 
get better prepared for drought, and to support people in times of drought.
	Î
We have 80 on-ground projects underway to trial and support adoption 
of land management practices that can lessen the effects of drought on 
agricultural productivity.
We’ve learnt from these programs and listened to feedback along the way. This has 
informed a second round of programs that was announced in the 2021-22 Budget. We’ll 
continue to take this iterative approach to the Future Drought Fund – listening, learning 
and adapting as we go. Annual reports such as this one is a key part of that cycle.
The Future Drought Fund is an important part of the Government’s Drought Response, 
Resilience and Preparedness Plan to deliver the support Australian farmers and 
communities need to be sustainable and productive.
The Hon David Littleproud MP
Minister for Agriculture and Northern Australia

v
Message from the Future 
Drought Fund Consultative 
Committee Chair
Financial year 2020–21 has been an exciting one for the Future Drought Fund – a chance 
to start to put plans into action and build the foundations for the fund.
The Future Drought Fund has moved steadily, but rapidly, since its beginning. It’s now 
2 years ago – 1 September 2019 – that the Future Drought Fund Act 2019 took effect and 
the fund came into being. A lot has been done in this time.
	Î
The Future Drought Fund Consultative Committee was formed, and we’ve met 
30 times since our formation, to provide independent expertise to guide the use of 
the fund.
	Î
The committee consulted broadly, right around Australia, hearing ideas from more 
than 690 people about what we should do to help Australian agriculture get better 
prepared for inevitable future droughts.
	Î
We developed the Drought Resilience Funding Plan 2020–2024, setting out objectives 
and actions to guide spending from the Future Drought Fund over the next 4 years.
	Î
A first round of programs was announced on 1 July 2020, as soon as the first 
allocation of funding became available. We’ve maintained an active role in overseeing 
the rollout of these programs to ensure they remain consistent with the Funding Plan.
	Î
Those programs were rapidly rolled out, starting the long task of building drought 
resilience and, just as importantly, generating engagement, momentum and 
collaboration around the important issue of drought resilience.
Added to these foundations, we’ve set up arrangements to properly administer 
the Future Drought Fund and its programs. These provide critical underpinnings for 
long-term success. This includes a monitoring, evaluation and learning framework, 
because regular review, reporting and, if needed, adjustment is critical. So too is 
continued regular engagement with stakeholders to get their views on how things are 
going and what we should be thinking about for the future.
This annual report supports both of these things. It’s a central part of how we’ll 
regularly communicate about what we’re doing and whether it’s working. It will support 
discussions with stakeholders about what we should do next.
This is so important because the Future Drought Fund is for everybody involved in 
Australian agriculture, and we need your regular input to ensure we get it right.
Brent Finlay
Chair
Future Drought Fund Consultative Committee

vi

Overview
vii
Contents
Minister’s message	
iii
Message from the Future Drought Fund Consultative
Committee Chair	
v
About this report	
viii
About the Future Drought Fund	
1
Future Drought Fund programs	
2
Harnessing innovation	
4
Better risk management	
10
Better climate information	
17
More resilient communities	
22
Better land management	
25
Progress in building drought resilience	
29
Future Drought Fund administration	
31
Appendix A: Potential measures of drought resilience	
38
Glossary	
43
References	
44 
Figures
1	
Future Drought Fund themes	
2
Tables
1	
Overview of Future Drought Fund programs	
3
2	
Annual reporting on progress and performance	
4
3	
Annual reporting on progress and performance	
10
4	
Annual reporting on progress and performance	
13
5	
Pilot regions	
15
6	
Annual reporting on progress and performance	
17
7	
Annual reporting on progress and performance	
22
8	
Locations of Drought Resilience Leaders Development pilot program	
24
9	
Annual reporting on progress and performance	
25
10	
Measuring changes in drought resilience	
30
11	
FDF funding allocated, contracted and expensed, 2020–21	
34
12	
FDF future funding	
35
A1	
Potential measures identified	
38
Maps
1	
Hubs and nodes	
7
2	
Pilot regions indicative boundaries	
21

viii Future Drought Fund Annual Report 2020–21 
About this report
Regular review and reporting is critical to the delivery of any program. This is 
particularly true for the delivery of an ambitious and enduring investment such as the 
Future Drought Fund.
This annual report is a part of the regular review and reporting arrangements in place 
for the Future Drought Fund. As well as providing an explanation of what has been 
achieved, it provides a framework for reporting on performance. This includes setting 
out and reporting against criteria and indicators for measuring and tracking success.
As the first annual report for the Future Drought Fund, this report has a focus on 
establishing a robust framework for measuring and reporting on performance. 
Future reports will increasingly focus on putting that framework into operation, 
as programs begin to deliver results and reach scheduled evaluation points.
This high-level reporting framework is complemented by detailed monitoring, 
evaluation and learning plans for each program. They contain more detailed 
arrangements for tracking and measuring success.
Annual reports are envisaged as a central part of an annual cycle for the Future Drought 
Fund. Following publication of the report, a submission and consultation process will 
be undertaken. This will provide an opportunity for stakeholders to share their views 
on performance and their ideas for what should be done into the future. Among other 
things, this will inform reporting to government as part of the annual federal budget 
process, including consideration of the allocation of Future Drought Fund funding.
What’s not in this report?
This annual report provides a whole of Future Drought Fund view across the multiple 
programs and activities underway. This includes a high-level framework for measuring 
and reporting success across the fund. The report does not cover the more detailed 
monitoring, evaluation and learning arrangements in place for each individual program.
This annual report covers drought resilience programs funded from the Future 
Drought Fund. It does not cover, in detail, the performance of the fund itself, – that is, 
the $5 billion invested by the Future Fund Board of Guardians. A $100 million is made 
available from the fund each year for spending on drought resilience. The Future Fund 
Board of Guardians reports annually on the investment performance of funds under 
its management.

1
About the Future Drought Fund
drought resilience in Australia’s agriculture sector, the agricultural landscape, and 
communities. It is a $5 billion commitment with $100 million each year allocated to 
drought resilience programs.
Design of programs is guided by the 4-year Drought Resilience Funding Plan 2020–2024. 
The government has already allocated $318.5 million to 2023–24.
Vision
The vision of the Future Drought Fund is an innovative and profitable farming sector, 
a sustainable natural environment and adaptable, rural, regional and remote communities – 
all with increased resilience to the impacts of drought and climate change.
Strategic priorities
The Future Drought Fund has 3 interconnected strategic priorities:
	Î Economic resilience for an innovative and profitable agriculture sector
	Î Environmental resilience for sustainable and improved functioning of farming landscapes
	Î Social resilience for resourceful and adaptable communities.
Objectives
To achieve the strategic priorities, the Future Drought Fund will enhance the public good by 
building drought resilience through programs that will achieve 3 objectives:
	Î Grow the self-reliance and performance (productivity and profitability) of the 
agricultural sector
	Î Improve the natural capital of agricultural landscapes for better environmental outcomes
	Î Strengthen the wellbeing and social capital of rural, regional and remote communities.

2
Future Drought Fund programs
The programs underway (shown in Table 1) funded from the Future Drought Fund are 
structured around the 5 themes shown in Figure 1 and contribute to the 3 strategic 
objectives of economic, environmental and social resilience to drought.
This report, in order:
	Î
reports against each of the 5 themes, including activities, achievements, and 
performance reporting
	Î
sets out a framework for how we will measure progress against the 3 strategic 
objectives of economic, environmental and social resilience to drought
	Î
reports on the administration of the Future Drought Fund, including the expenditure 
of funds and the operations of the Future Drought Fund Consultative Committee.
Building 
Drought 
Resilience
Harnessing
innovation
Better risk
management
Better climate
information
More resilient
communities
Better land 
management
Harnessing innovation
driving adoption of new drought 
resilient technologies and practices
Better risk management 
helping farmers and regions plan 
for drought
Better climate information 
making climate information 
accessible and useful
More resilient communities 
building social capital to drive 
change and support resilient 
communities
Better land management 
trial and adoption of land 
management practices that support 
landscape resilience
FIGURE 1 Future Drought Fund themes

3
TABLE 1 Overview of Future Drought Fund programs
Themes
Program
Program overview
Funding to 
2023–24 
($’000)
Economic
Environmental
Social
Harnessing 
innovation
Drought Resilience 
Research and Adoption 
Program
Investing in collaborative research, 
development, extension and adoption 
and commercialisation activities
121,053
• • •
Better risk 
management
Farm Business 
Resilience Program
Supporting learning and development 
for famers in strategic business 
management, farm risk management, 
natural resource management and 
personal and social resilience
75,965
• • •
Regional Drought 
Resilience Planning
Supporting regions to develop drought 
resilience plans
40,853
• • •
Better climate 
information
Climate Services 
for Agriculture
Delivering an interactive digital 
platform, bringing together a variety 
of climate information specifically for 
farmers and the agricultural sector
15,000
• • •
Drought Resilience 
Self-Assessment Tool 
(DRSAT)
Delivering an online tool that will 
enable farmers to assess their 
exposure to drought and other 
climate risks
10,000
• • •
More resilient 
communities
Networks to Build 
Drought Resilience
Building capacity and capability of 
community organisations to support 
drought preparedness
7,750
  •
Drought Resilience 
Leaders
Enabling leaders to support their 
communities to meet the future 
challenges arising from drought and 
changing climate
11,450
• • •
Better land 
management
NRM Drought 
Resilience
Drought Resilient 
Agricultural Landscapes
Trialling and adopting transformational 
on-ground practices, approaches and 
systems to mitigate the future effects 
on a region’s agriculture and broader 
landscapes
36,429
• •
Total
318,500

4
Drought Resilience Research and Adoption program
Objectives
Program information
The strategy
Drive the development, extension, adoption and commercialisation of new drought 
resilient technologies and practices, including through new Drought Resilience Adoption 
and Innovation Hubs
What are we trying 
to achieve?
A step-change in the development, adoption and commercialisation of drought resilience 
technologies and practices
How will this support 
drought resilience?
Uptake of new technologies and practices can reduce exposure to drought risks, enabling 
agricultural businesses to sustain productivity and profitability in times of drought
How will we 
assess whether it’s 
successful?
Overall success measures
knowledge that can be applied to improve drought resilience (HI 1)
•	 There’s increased adoption and commercialisation of drought resilience technologies 
and practices (HI 2)
•	 The technologies and practices adopted are effective in improving drought resilience 
(HI 3)
•	 Design and delivery of hub activities is responsive to end-user needs (HI 4)
TABLE 2 Annual reporting on progress and performance
2020–21 results
2021–22
2022–23
2023–24
8 Drought Resilience 
Adoption and 
Innovation Hubs 
established
Inaugural Science to 
Practice forum held
(HI 1) Drought Resilience 
Research and Adoption 
Investment Plan delivered
(HI 4) Hub partnership 
arrangements are 
embedded, and co-designed 
activity plans in place
(HI 1, HI 2) Number and 
nature of activities to support 
research, development, 
extension, adoption and 
commercialisation (RDEA&C) 
and uptake by end users
(HI 1) Attendance at annual 
Science to Practice forum 
(SPF)
(HI 1) Hub linkages in the 
innovation system
(HI 2, HI 3, HI 4) Uptake 
of the Drought Resilience 
Research and Adoption 
Investment Plan priorities 
by hubs and research 
organisations
(HI 1) Improvement in 
end-user access to DEA&C 
information
(HI 1, HI 2) Number of 
activities to support RDEA&C 
uptake by end users
Attendance at SPF (HI 1)
(All measures) Reporting on 
mid-program evaluation
(All measures) As in 2022–23 
– activities to support 
DEA&C
(HI 2, HI 3, HI 4) Case studies 
of uptake by end users
(HI 4) Number of 
partnerships developed to 
support RDEA&C
(HI 1) Attendance at SPF
(HI2, HI3) End-of-program 
evaluation – extent to which 
there is increased adoption 
of drought resilience 
technologies and practices 
and evidence that these 
are effective in improving 
drought resilience.
Harnessing innovation
Driving the development and adoption of new 
drought resilient technologies and practices

Harnessing innovation
5
The Drought Resilience Research and Adoption program is helping farmers and 
rural and regional communities build drought resilience through investment into 
collaborative research, development, extension, adoption and commercialisation 
(RDEA&C) activities.
The program has the following interconnected elements:
	Î
Drought Resilience Adoption and Innovation Hubs around Australia to provide 
RDEA&C support that is responsive to regional needs and opportunities
	Î
Innovation grants to support RDEA&C projects (grants available in 2021–22)
	Î
On-ground adoption officers to facilitate uptake by farmers and agribusinesses of 
services and activities provided by the hubs (funding from 2021–22)
	Î
Enabling activities that inform and connect RDEA&C activities:
\
a Drought Resilience Research and Adoption Investment Plan to identify the 
highest national drought RDEA&C priorities (to be published in 2021–22)
\
a knowledge platform to capture and share drought resilience knowledge
\
annual Science to Practice forums to support dissemination and uptake of 
innovative practices.
Drought Resilience Adoption and 
Innovation Hubs
In April 2021, 8 hubs were selected following 
a competitive grants process.
The hubs are located in major climatic and 
agriculture zones across Australia. Each hub 
has several nodes, providing a dispersed 
presence throughout the region. Currently the 
hubs and nodes cover over 40 locations, and 
involve 143 partners.
Hubs will support primary producers in 
building drought resilience through practical 
development, extension, adoption and 
commercialisation services. These services 
will meet needs specific to primary producers 
in each hub region. 
For example, hub activities will include:
	Î
on-farm trials of drought 
resilient practices
	Î
training in the use of decision-support 
tools such as soil moisture predictors and 
climate forecasting
	Î
training packages to share Indigenous knowledge regarding drought
	Î
educating researchers in effective co-design of research activities
	Î
peer-to-peer learning among primary producers through workshops, farm visits, 
seminars and other collaborative networks
	Î
upskilling primary producers in commercialisation opportunities and practices
	Î
commercialising products and processes that increase drought resilience.
(L–R) Garth Hamilton MP, Professor Gavin Ash and 
Minister Littleproud at the Southern Queensland—
Northern New South Wales Hub launch. 
Photo: Emma Anderson

Harnessing innovation
6
The hubs were formally established (i.e. contracted) just before the end of the 2020–21 
financial year. Their first task is to develop detailed activity plans, through co-design 
and participatory processes with stakeholders in their region. This is to ensure that 
hub activities are strongly responsive to the needs and opportunities of the region 
they service. 
To support this initial planning, as well as ongoing engagement, each hub has a 
knowledge broker. Knowledge brokers help intended users of research and innovation 
to define the questions they need answered by science, then help to translate the science 
into practice. Knowledge brokers will also connect the hubs to other Future Drought 
Fund (FDF) programs to ensure there is information and capability flow across all 
FDF programs.
The 2021–22 Budget also allocated funding to enable hubs to employ adoption officers 
to connect people to the support available from their hub. A process to get adoption 
officers in place will be run in early 2022, once each hub completes its activity planning.
The department provides support and connections across the hubs. This includes 
building networks and communities of practice between the hubs to foster 
cross-hub collaboration.
Drought Resilience Research and Adoption Advisory Committee
In May 2021 the Drought Resilience Research and Adoption Advisory Committee was 
established to support strategic oversight of the Drought Resilience Adoption and 
Innovation Hubs and the broader Drought Resilience Research and Adoption program. 
Among other things, the committee helps to provide a cross-hub, national perspective. 
It provides advice to the minister and the department.
The Advisory Committee is chaired by Mr Brent Finlay (also the Chair of the Future Drought 
Fund Consultative Committee), and the other members are Caroline Welsh (also a member 
of the Future Drought Fund Consultative Committee), Emeritus Professor James Rowe, 
Dale Park, Trent De Paoli and Dr Christine Pitt.

Harnessing innovation
7
MAP 1 Hubs and nodes
1
2
3
5
4
6
6
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
8
9
4
2
3
4
5
1
1
5
2
1
5
6
1
3
2
4
2
3 4
5
3
7
Northern WA/NT Hub: 
Charles Darwin University
Covering all NT & WA tropical Top 
End and range lands
1 Northern WA/NT Hub
Charles Darwin University
2 Katherine node
3 Alice Springs node
4 Perth node
5 Broome node
South West WA Hub: 
Grower Group Alliance
Covering entire southern area of 
WA, split into North-Central and 
South-West. and southern and 
eastern South-West WA
1 South-West WA Hub
Merredin Dryland Research
Institute
2 Esperance node
3 Katanning node
Katanning Research Station
4 Albany node
5 Manjimup node
Manjimup Research Station
6 Bunbury node
7 Northam node
Northam Research Station
8 Geraldton node
9 Carnarvon node
Carnarvon Research Station
TAS Hub: 
University of Tasmania
Covering all three major agricultural 
regions
1 TAS Hub Hobart
University of Tasmania
2 Elliot node
3 Burnie node
4 Forthside node
5 Launceston node
Tropical North QLD Hub: 
James Cook University
Covering the Gulf to the dry west, 
through to the coast 
and north to Cape York
1 TNQ Hub Cairns
James Cook University
2 Gulf Savannah node
Northern Gulf Resource Management
Group Ltd
3 Gulf of Carpentaria node
Southern Gulf Natural
Resource Management Pty Ltd
4 Fitzroy node
Fitzroy Basin Association
5 Mackay and Whitsundays 
node
Reef Catchments (Mackay
Whitsundays Isaac) Ltd
6 Burdekin node
NQ Dry Tropics Ltd
Southern QLD/Northern 
NSW Hub: University of 
Southern Queensland
Covering from Longreach to Dubbo 
and from the coast to the SA and NT 
borders in the west
1 SQLD/NNSW Hub 
University of Southern
Queensland
2 Armidale node 
University of New England
3 Lismore node
Southern Cross University
4 Stanthorpe node
Queensland College of Wine Tourism
5 Narrabri node
NSW Department of Primary
Industries
6 Longreach node
Remote Area Planning and 
Development Board
7 Roma node
Southern Queensland Landscapes
SA Hub:
University of Adelaide
Covering SA’s pastoral, low, medium 
and high rainfall mixed farming lands
1 SA Hub Roseworthy
University of Adelaide
2 Minnipa node
3 Port Augusta node
4 Orroroo node
5 Loxton node
6 Struan node
Southern NSW Hub: 
Charles Sturt University
Covering the far west, Riverina, 
Monaro and coastal plains
1 SNSW Hub Wagga Wagga 
(Nodes being determined)
VIC Hub: 
University of Melbourne
Covering North-West, North-East, 
South-West and Gippsland
1 VIC Hub Dookie
University of Melbourne
2 Gippsland node
Food and Fibre Gippsland
3 South-West node
Southern Farming Systems
4 North-West node
Birchip Cropping Group
5 NW Irrigated Horticulture
node 
Mallee Regional Innovation Centre
6 North-East node
Riverine Plains Inc
1
7
6
5
2
3
4

Harnessing innovation
8
Drought Resilience Innovation Grants
Drought Resilience Innovation Grants will fund RDEA&C activities.
In the 2021–22 Budget, the government announced that funding allocated in 2020–21 as 
part of the first tranche of foundational FDF programs would be combined with funding 
in future years to support a larger and longer innovation grants process. There is now 
$34.1 million available over 2021 to 2023–24. A call for expressions of interest opened 
in July 2021.
Drought Resilience Research and Adoption 
Investment Plan
The Drought Resilience Research and Adoption Investment Plan will identify national 
priorities for drought resilience related research and adoption. The plan is intended 
to inform:
	Î
the activities of the hubs
	Î
entities undertaking research and development, such as rural research and 
development corporations, universities, and the Commonwealth Scientific and 
Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO)
	Î
potential future FDF investments.
In 2020–21 a consultative process was undertaken to inform the development of the 
plan. This included engagement with agricultural producers and communities through 
a survey, online workshops, private submissions, a stocktake of drought resilience 
research in Australia and a review of international literature on drought resilience.
This work was led by a consortium involving Alluvium Consulting, Natural Capital 
Economics, the Australian Farm Institute and Climate Communications.
The department will undertake further consultations in 2021–22 before finalising 
the plan in early 2022.
Science to Practice forum
Science to Practice forums showcase the activities of the Drought Resilience Research 
and Adoption program and, through this, support change and adoption.
At the inaugural forum in June 2021, the 8 new Drought Resilience Adoption and 
Innovation Hubs presented their co-design priorities. In addition, presenters including 
farmers, economists and Indigenous knowledge holders explored the economic, 
environmental and social aspects of building drought resilience.
Across 3 days, more than 800 registrants engaged with more than 40 presentations, 
joining online or attending events across Australia. Participants spent an average of 
10 hours online. There were more than 1,000 comments made in the online chat and 
more than 100 questions to presenters. Primary producers reported that they were able 
to address issues on their properties without missing presentations.
Planning is underway for the 2022 Science to Practice forum.

Harnessing innovation
9
‘It was absolutely fantastic that the entire event was online. I had urgent 
field work to attend to and was able to follow the presentations quite well’
‘The most valuable thing I learned [at the forum] was collaboration 
is possible between federal, state, regional and industry groups and 
landholders.’
Have Your Say survey respondents
Forum host Andrew Bell and First Assistant Secretary, Drought and Farm Resilience, Kerren Crosthwaite, in the 
Canberra studio. 
Photo: Lucy Morrell

10
There are 2 programs under this theme:
	Î
Farm Business Resilience Program
	Î
Regional Drought Resilience Planning.
Farm Business Resilience Program
Objectives
Program information
The strategy
Build the capacity of farmers to plan for and manage risks, including drought
What are we trying 
to achieve?
A step-change in the use of farm business management skills to proactively manage 
drought risks
How will this support 
drought resilience?
Farmers who have better business management skills, and plan for risks, are more likely 
to take actions that help sustain farm business productivity and profitability in times 
of drought
How will we 
assess whether it’s 
successful?
Overall success measures
•	 There’s an increase in the business management skills and confidence of farmers to 
manage risk (RM 1)
•	 There’s an increase in farm business plans that consider drought risks (RM 2)
•	 More farmers are taking actions to manage risk, including drought (RM 3)
TABLE 3 Annual reporting on progress and performance
2020–21 results
2021–22
2022–23
2023–24
All states and territories 
agreed to partner with 
the Commonwealth, 
and designed programs
(RM 1, RM 2) Number 
of participants, training 
and other learning 
events, and farm 
performance assessments
(RM 2) Number of 
farm business plans 
developed/updated and 
professionally reviewed
(All measures) Change in 
participant surveys and farm 
performance assessments
(RM 1, RM 3) Case studies 
selected for monitoring 
post participation
As for 2021–22, plus:
(All measures) Monitoring 
of case studies
(All measures) mid-program 
evaluation
As for 2021–22, plus:
(All measures) final 
evaluation
Better risk management
Helping farmers and regions plan for drought

Better risk management
11
Working with state and territory governments, the Farm Business Resilience Program is 
providing farmers, including farm managers and employees, with access to learning and 
development opportunities in strategic business management, farm risk management 
and decision-making, natural resource management, and personal and social resilience.
The program supports farmers to develop or update their existing farm business plan, 
tailored to their circumstances. Farmers also have access to one-on-one professional 
advice on the plan and its implementation.
In 2020–21 all states and territories agreed to partner with the Commonwealth to 
design and deliver the program. Within the context of a national framework, each state 
and territory has tailored its design and delivery for its local context, building on existing 
initiatives delivered via government and industry.
Stakeholder comments: National Farmers’ Federation 
‘This [Farm Business Resilience] program will be crucial in building our 
farmers fundamental business and strategic planning skills with respect to 
resilience and preparedness …
‘It is pleasing to see federal and state governments working together 
and pooling resources to deliver resilience and preparedness measures to farmers …
‘These workshops will be a great opportunity for farmers to take their business to the 
next level from a risk management, resilience and preparedness perspective.’
Tony Mahar, Chief Executive Officer, National Farmers’ Federation

Better risk management
12
In 2021–22 state and territory governments will start rolling out the program. 
The Commonwealth will also work with each jurisdiction to agree on the details 
of an extension to the program, announced in the 2021–22 Budget. The extended 
program allocates $60 million over the next 3 years. This aims to achieve change at 
a meaningful scale – reaching as many as 17,000 farmers and providing follow-up 
support for participants.
case studies
Programs tailored to the needs of the regions receive 
positive feedback
In New South Wales, through the NSW Department of Primary Industries, farmers will 
be supported by expert business coaches to take a custom co-designed learning journey, 
in both a small-group setting and via extensive one-on-one coaching.
The competitive expressions of interest process, which closed on 31 August 2021, 
resulted in over 170 applications from farm businesses, of which 150 will be selected to 
participate in the program. This means that potentially 300 farmers will be coached, as 
most businesses will have at least 2 participants. Other public events will engage a further 
3,000 farmers in skill-building activities such as webinars and farmer-led field days.
‘The feedback from farmers has been very positive to date,’ said NSW program manager 
Alex Hicks.
‘The farmers we have spoken with have all been really excited by the opportunity to utilise 
the coaching for capacity and skill building and the support to help take their business to 
the next level.’
In Victoria, Agriculture Victoria is piloting the program to farmers from the grains, red 
meat, and dairy industries, as well as all young farmers. Farmers will undertake peer-group 
and one-on-one learning, supported by Agriculture Victoria staff and a professional farm 
management consultant, through practical and interactive workshop sessions.
Dairy Australia is collaborating with Agriculture Victoria to build on and leverage its existing 
Our Farm, Our Plan program to pilot the dairy component of the program.
The program will support farmers to adapt to a changing climate and strengthen the 
resilience of their farm business to withstand future shocks and challenges. Sixty-three 
participants have been involved in the program delivery to date (1 September 2021).
One participant attending a ‘Successful People’ session commented that it was a ‘great 
event, was very happy with how it was presented, had some really quality speakers and 
I got a lot out of the discussions we had ’.

Better risk management
13
Regional Drought Resilience Planning
Objectives
Program information
The strategy
Establish drought resilience plans across agricultural regions, based on evidence and 
collaboration, to drive proactive management of drought risks
What are we trying 
to achieve?
Regional drought resilience plans drive decisions, actions and investments to proactively 
manage drought risks
How will this support 
drought resilience?
Informed and planned action to manage drought risks at a regional scale will support 
resilience of the region’s economy, farmers, businesses, communities, and the landscape
How will we 
assess whether it’s 
successful?
Overall success measures
•	 There’s an increase in the number of agricultural regions that have drought resilience 
plans (RM 4)
•	 Plans have buy-in from key stakeholders in the region (RM 5)
•	 Plans are informed by relevant data, co-design and best practice approaches to 
resilience planning (RM6)
•	 Plans are implemented (RM 7)
TABLE 4 Annual reporting on progress and performance
2020–21 results
2021–22
2022–23
2023–24
All states and territories 
agreed to partner with 
the Commonwealth, 
and designed 
detailed programs
(RM 4, RM 6) Number 
of plans commenced 
developed, drafted, 
assessed, approved 
and published
(RM 5) Number and extent 
of stakeholder engagements 
in planning processes
(RM 5, RM 6, RM 7) 
Case studies selected for 
monitoring post-planning 
(e.g. stakeholder buy-in 
and implementation)
(All measures) As in 2021–22 
– monitoring outputs, 
independent assessments, 
and implementation
(RM 4, RM 6) Extent to 
which plans identify and 
respond to key risks
(RM 5, RM 6) Extent to which 
stakeholders co-designed/
partnered in planning 
(qualitative via independent 
assessments, surveys)
(RM 7) Number of plans 
implemented (grants or 
other means)
(All measures) 
Interim evaluation
(All measures) As in 
2022–23 – monitoring 
outputs, surveys and/or 
independent assessments, 
implementation, and 
case studies
(All measures) End-of-
program evaluation

Better risk management
14
Working with the state and territory governments, the Regional Drought Resilience 
Planning program is supporting regions to develop regional drought resilience plans 
to prepare for and manage future drought risks.
These plans will be community led and will be owned through partnerships of 
local governments, regional organisations, communities and industry. They will 
be independently assessed and published to allow communities to learn from 
each other, considering each region’s unique conditions – socially, economically 
and environmentally.
Regions will also partner with networks of primary producers and community groups 
through their local Drought Resilience Adoption and Innovation Hub to improve 
drought resilience.
From 2021–22, small grants will be available to take forward priority actions identified 
in regional plans.
The focus in 2020–21 was to seek agreement from all states and territories to partner 
with the Commonwealth and co-design tailored delivery arrangements in each 
jurisdiction. Planning activities are now getting underway in 23 regions.

Better risk management
15
TABLE 5 Pilot regions
NSW
3 regions
Yet to be announced
VIC
3 regions
Wimmera Southern Mallee Regional Partnership
Goulburn Regional Partnership and Gippsland Regional Partnership
QLD
5 regions
Yet to be announced
SA
3 regions
Yet to be announced
WA
3 regions
Northern Midwest, Southern Wheatbelt and Great Southern Inland
NT
2 regions
Southern Alice Springs Pastoral District and Barkly Pastoral District
TAS
3 regions
South, North, North-West
ACT
1 region
Whole of ACT
In 2021–22 this first round of regional plans will be developed. The Commonwealth 
will also work with each jurisdiction to agree on the details of an extension to 
the program. The extended program, announced in the 2021-22 Budget, has been 
allocated $31 million. It aims to establish regional drought resilience plans for all major 
agricultural regions. It will also provide some funding to help with the implementation 
of the regional plans.
Stakeholder comments: Red Cross and CSIRO
The Red Cross has been advocating for some time for more attention and 
resources to be directed towards building real capacity at community level 
for drought resilience planning and preparedness.
‘Through our recent Drought Discussion Paper, we found a widespread need 
for more practical community-based planning for drought Resilience, Relief and Recovery.
‘Drought has a variety of different types of impacts – hydrological, agricultural, economic 
as well as environmental, social, cultural, wellbeing and “psychosocial” – which affect each 
community and region very differently.
‘We have designed a community-led model that supports regions to identify their critical 
impacts, understand what resources are available to them and then propose priority actions. 
It is really heartening to see that the Future Drought Fund has included so many of these 
critical elements in the design of their new Regional Drought Resilience Planning (RDRP) 
program.
‘Well done. The Red Cross looks forward to cooperating with RDRP projects in whatever way 
we can.’
Collin Sivalingum, Australian Red Cross, State Emergency Services Manager, Queensland
‘The Regional Drought Resilience Plan is an important investment that recognises resilience to 
drought needs to be developed at multiple scales including at a regional level. The program 
framework guide aligns with the Resilience, Adaptation and Transformation Approach (RAPTA), 
a best practice guideline synthesising planning of interventions for building regional resilience, 
drawing from research across CSIRO, Australia and internationally and consistent with the 
with Community Resilience work package of CSIRO Drought Resilience Mission.’
Yiheyis T Maru, Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO), 
Principal Research Scientist – Team Leader: Adaptation Pathways and Social Transition

Better risk management
16
case studies
Delivery across Australia is tailored to the needs of regions, 
building on existing regional structures and strategic planning
In Western Australia the Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development 
is working with the state’s Regional Development Commissions to pilot regional drought 
resilience plans in selected local authority areas of the Midwest, Wheatbelt, and Great 
Southern regions (covering some 16 local government areas). Regional Development 
Commissions will facilitate partnerships with local government, communities, industry 
and NRM groups, among others, to develop a community led and owned drought 
resilience plan to prepare for and manage the impacts of drought.
In Tasmania the Local Government Association will play a leading role in the Regional 
Drought Resilience Planning program across 3 key regions: the south, the north, and 
the north-west.
A Department of Premier and Cabinet representative said, ‘By working closely with our 
partners at a local government level and leveraging off the existing regional networks the 
Local Government Association of Tasmania already has in place, we will enable the program 
to capitalise at a regional level and build local capacity to increase drought resilience.’
The Queensland program will work with the Rural Economies Centre of Excellence to 
engage with local governments and other local stakeholders to develop up to 5 regional 
drought resilience plans in its pilot year. The regional drought resilience plans will form 
supplements to broader resilience plans being developed through the Queensland 
Reconstruction Authority’s Queensland Strategy for Disaster Resilience and its 
implementation plan Resilient Queensland.

17
Climate Services for Agriculture; Drought Resilience Self-Assessment Tool
Objectives
Program information
The strategy
Establish new authoritative national capabilities that make climate information accessible 
and useful for understanding climate risk and resilience
What are we trying 
to achieve?
The new national capabilities are actively used by farmers, agribusinesses and 
communities to understand climate risks, resilience, and adaptation pathways, and to 
inform action
How will this support 
drought resilience?
Farmers, businesses and communities that better understand their climate risks, resilience, 
and adaptation pathways are more likely to take action to manage drought risk
How will we 
assess whether it’s 
successful?
Overall success measures
•	 The climate information capabilities are used and valued by the target audience (CI 1)
•	 Users take action in response to the improved information and understanding (CI 2)
•	 The climate services platform and the self-assessment tool are scientifically 
rigorous (CI 3)
TABLE 6 Annual reporting on progress and performance
2020–21 results
2021–22
2022–23
2023–24
Digital prototype of 
the Climate Services 
for Agriculture (CSA) 
platform released
Web-based 
Drought Resilience 
Self-Assessment Tool 
(DRSAT) prototype 
released
Four pilot regions 
selected as a basis for 
further development of 
the capabilities
CI 1) User numbers and 
experiences measured from 
reference group feedback 
and web statistics (CSA and 
DRSAT prototypes)
(CI 1) Evidence of co-design 
process
(CI 1) FDF-level survey to 
gauge and extend reach, 
and to help set target reach
(CI 2) FDF-level survey 
to gauge actions taken 
in response to improved 
information from (a) CSA 
and (b) DRSAT
(CI 3) Peer review has 
validated further platform 
development for CSA, 
including impact insights 
and adaptation opportunities
(All measures) Program case 
studies and commissioned 
studies explore and assess 
reasons/drivers/barriers 
around farmers’ use of the 
CSA platform and DRSAT
(CI 1, CI 2) Evaluation: 
use and value placed on CSA 
and DRSAT to base local 
and regional agricultural 
resilience decisions and 
related actions on
Better climate information
Making climate information more accessible 
and useful

Better climate information
18
Climate Services for Agriculture program
The Climate Services for Agriculture (CSA) program will deliver an interactive digital 
platform bringing together a variety of climate information specifically for farmers and 
the agricultural sector. It will enable agricultural businesses, planners, communities 
and others to explore climate data and projections, understand how projected future 
climates may impact different regions and commodities, and identify associated risks 
and adaptation pathways. This will help people to anticipate and plan for the impacts of 
a variable and changing climate.
The CSA platform will be complimented by the Drought Resilience Self-Assessment Tool 
(DRSAT). The DRSAT will enable farmers to get a farm-scale perspective on climate risk 
and resilience, whereas the platform is regional in focus. The platform will also be more 
data and analytics rich, catering to more data-driven users, whereas the DRSAT is being 
designed as a readily accessible decision support tool for farm businesses.
When fully developed, the platform will include:
	Î
analysis of climate impacts and risks for all major agricultural commodities at 
national and regional scales, as well as seasonal forecasts
	Î
information on regional-scale adaptation options and actions that can help build 
resilience – including natural capital, water, community resilience, farm finances 
and markets.
The platform is being developed by the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial 
Research Organisation (CSIRO) and the Bureau of Meteorology (BOM), drawing on 
their climate data and analytical capabilities.
A prototype of the platform was developed in 2020–21 and released in June 2021. 
This prototype brings together historical and future projected climate information at 
a resolution of 5 km across Australia. This includes information about past and future 
rainfall, temperature, heat and frost risk and evapotranspiration. This is the first time 
the bite-size pieces of data and analytics relating to climate have been provided in a 
single location.

Better climate information
19
The further development of the platform will involve co-design and engagement within 
pilot regions. Four pilot regions were selected in 2020–21, and others will be selected 
in the future. Pilot regions were selected to include a broad range of different climatic 
zones, commodities, and production systems. This provides a basis for ultimately 
extrapolating from pilot regions to a national capability.
The first 4 pilot regions are North Queensland Dry Tropics, Condamine and 
Northern Tablelands, Victorian Mallee, and south-east South Australia and 
Western Australia sheep-wheat belt.
Within each pilot region, CSIRO and BOM will engage with intended users of the platform 
to understand how future climate could impact their region and their production 
systems, and identify possible adaptation options. User input will also inform the look 
and feel of the platform, to ensure information is accessible and engaging. Co-design is 
primarily targeting farmers and advisers in the establishment phase of the program but 
will be expanded in future years to include input from other intended users including 
state and local governments, NRM planners and the finance sector.
In 2021–22 the priorities are:
	Î
to evolve the digital platform, making it simple and intuitive to use while increasing 
functionality, data availability and insights. This includes providing analysis of 
future climate impacts on 13 key agricultural commodities across 4 pilot regions and 
incorporating a seasonal forecast capability
	Î
to continue to work with end users to understand their needs and the potential 
climate vulnerabilities of their production systems and to start developing possible 
adaptation options.
Drought Resilience Self-Assessment Tool
The DRSAT is an online tool that will enable farmers to work through an assessment of 
their exposure to future drought and other climate risks based on economic, social, and 
environmental indicators. Based on their personal circumstances, the tool will suggest 
ways in which farmers can build their resilience and adaptive capacity.
The DRSAT complements the CSA platform (see above). The DRSAT is targeted at the 
farm scale, whereas the CSA platform is regional in focus. The DRSAT will allow farmers 
to add farm-scale data to the regional-scale data and analysis of the CSA platform, 
producing a farm-scale picture of climate risks, resilience, and areas for attention.
A prototype, informed by expert advice and user testing, was released on 30 June 2021. 
The prototype at this point is a basis for engagement with expected users of the DRSAT 
on intended functionality and usability.
Engagement with expected users of the tool will occur primarily in the same pilot 
regions as for the CSA program.
A first version of a functional DRSAT is expected to be launched in December 2021, 
with further updates following. Once the tool is launched, farmers anywhere in Australia 
will be able to use it to:
	Î
get a range of farm-specific information, such as information about the status 
of ground cover
	Î
complete assessments of their personal, social and financial resilience
	Î
discover pathways to build resilience – linking users to support tools and networks.

Better climate information
20
In pilot regions, farmers with dryland cereal crops and cattle graziers will also be 
able to:
	Î
complete a farm-scale assessment of their environmental resilience
	Î
get sector-specific insights such as projected future changes to production conditions.
The tool is being developed by Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu, following a competitive 
tender process.
case studies
Designing the Drought Resilience Self-Assessment Tool together
‘We believe that the best way to understand what farmers want is to simply ask them – 
and keep asking. But we don’t just listen – we act on what we have heard. To ensure that our 
designs remain aligned to farmers’ goals, we refine based on what we learn.
‘We are taking farmers along on the journey of developing their drought resilience tool.’
DAWE and Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu
A tool for farmers
To build a practical and trusted tool, we’ve been engaging with farmers and their advisers 
throughout the design of the Drought Resilience Self-Assessment Tool (DRSAT) prototype. 
To date, this includes 23 interviews across 4 pilot regions and 169 survey responses, 
helping us to understand the challenges farmers face because of drought and which 
types of information and resources would be most useful, and to test initial designs to 
see what resonates.
The majority of participants interviewed or surveyed were over the age of 45. Two-thirds 
had over 20 years in the farming industry, 68% were small to medium farmers, and 
25% were advisers. We continue to seek a variety of perspectives to reflect the diversity 
of DRSAT’s potential users.
Insights from our research have informed the development of user personas and a set 
of design principles, which will continue to be refined as we build the tool.
A trusted source
DRSAT enables assessment of resilience across environmental, financial and personal/social 
dimensions. To develop it, we’ve worked with more than 80 experts from a range of fields, 
including those with direct farming experience. They have also helped to refine the options 
for adaptation pathways – helping farmers improve their response to drought.
User feedback
‘If it’s easy to navigate, doesn’t take up too much time and has some useful practical 
information, then I would not hesitate to check it out.’
‘I’m not restricted by what my grandfather has done, if there is a better way to do it, we do it 
that way … we’re always looking to improve.’
‘Anything that can make access to advice and resources easier and facilitate that is certainly 
a good thing.’

Better climate information
21
MAP 2 Pilot regions indicative boundaries
Pilot regions
DARWIN
BRISBANE
CANBERRA
MELBOURNE
SYDNEY
HOBART
North Qld Dry Tropics
Victorian Mallee & south-east South Australia
Condamine & Northern Tablelands
Western Australian sheep-wheat belt
ADELAIDE
PERTH
MILDURA
TOWNSVILLE
ARMIDALE

22
Networks to Build Drought Resilience; Drought Resilience Leaders
Objectives
Program information
The strategy
Establish and support a national cohort of community leaders, networks, mentors and 
organisations to drive action on drought resilience in their community
What are we trying 
to achieve?
Communities have the capabilities and motivation to drive action to plan and prepare 
for drought
How will this support 
drought resilience?
Community leaders, mentors, networks and organisations play a key role in driving 
changes in drought preparedness attitudes and action, and supporting people in times 
of drought
How will we 
assess whether it’s 
successful?
Overall success measures
•	 There’s an increase in the reach and activities of community leaders, mentors, networks 
and organisations driving action on drought resilience (RC 1)
•	 There’s a change in awareness of and attitudes to drought preparedness at the 
community level (RC 2)
TABLE 7 Annual reporting on progress and performance
2020–21 results
2021–22
2022–23
2023–24
Partnered with the 
Australian Rural 
Leadership Foundation 
to develop a program 
to build leadership and 
mentoring networks
Partnered with the 
Foundation for Rural 
and Regional Renewal 
(FRRR) to design 
programs to support 
community networks 
and organisations
(RC 1) Numbers, types and 
reach of people trained, 
mentored, mentoring, or 
engaged in other activities
(RC 1) Numbers and types of 
community capacity building 
and engagement projects
(RC 2) Baseline assessment 
of awareness, attitudes 
and sense of preparedness 
(survey)
(RC 1, RC 2) As in 2021–22
(RC 1) Evaluation: evidence 
that program activities have 
increased capacity where 
gaps existed
(RC 1) Evaluation: evidence 
of communities planning to 
manage drought risk
(RC 2) Evaluation: evidence 
of behaviour change/action 
(e.g. income diversification)
(RC1, RC 2) As in 2022–23
(RC 1) Mapping of gaps
(RC 1) Evaluation: evidence of 
impact from programs, and 
testing the theory of how 
this occurs
(RC1, RC 2) Revision of 
program approach
More resilient communities
Building social capital to drive change and support 
resilient communities

More resilient communities
23
Networks to Build Drought Resilience
The Networks to Build Drought Resilience program seeks to build the capacity and 
capability of community organisations and networks to support drought preparedness.
In 2020–21 the FRRR was selected through a competitive grants process to design and 
deliver the program. The program will provide support to community groups through 
4 streams:
	Î
Activities that strengthen the capacity and capability of network organisations, 
including increasing the reach of network members
	Î
Activities that facilitate professional, social and community network events 
that contribute to building a positive community culture
	Î
Training that improves the skills and capacity of network members to plan and 
drive community projects
	Î
Small-scale community infrastructure, such as improved community meeting places.
In early 2021–22 the FRRR opened the first of 2 rounds seeking applications for 
small-scale competitive grants addressing these 4 streams. All projects will be 
completed by late 2022.
case studies
Networks to build drought resilience
Women on the Land Ltd, South Australia: This project will deliver 5 workshops 
to improve the confidence and reduce social isolation of rural and regional women, 
while also providing planning and coping tools for the participants to share with their 
broader networks. Focusing on decision-making, preparedness and land management, 
the workshops will provide a platform to discuss mental health issues of rural and regional 
women, while also providing access to service providers and the opportunity to build 
networks for ongoing cohesion.
FarmLink Research Ltd: This FarmLink project will host an interactive workshop for 
young farmers to build the skills and networks required to manage the impacts of stress 
during drought, intergenerational relationships and communicating effectively within 
family farm businesses. This event will bring together young farmers and experts in rural 
and regional resilience and mental health. Through facilitated discussions, the project will 
build awareness in practical on-farm strategies that improve the participants’ capability 
to manage the stresses associated with drought and climate change in preparing for 
the future.

More resilient communities
24
Drought Resilience Leaders
The Drought Resilience Leaders program is providing opportunities for young 
(18–34 year old) and emerging (any age) community leaders to gain the knowledge 
and skills required to support their rural, regional and remote communities to meet 
the future challenges arising from drought and a changing climate.
In 2020–21 the Australian Rural Leadership Foundation was selected through a 
competitive grants process to design and deliver the program’s 3 streams:
	Î
Drought Resilience Leadership Development – to develop the leadership, 
communication and engagement skills and networks of young and emerging leaders 
in agriculture-dependent communities, with a focus on drought and climate resilience 
and adaptation. Delivered across 12 regions, this stream will develop a cohort of at 
least 480 future leaders.
	Î
Community Extension Grants – to support selected participants from the 
Drought Resilience Leadership Development stream to undertake a community 
engagement project in their local community that builds the community’s resilience 
to the risks of future droughts.
	Î
Drought Resilience Mentoring – to build farmers’ skills in managing drought and 
climate resilience and adaptation, by connecting farmers with other farmers and 
professionals who have demonstrated experience in managing through drought and 
a changing climate. Connecting 300 mentees with 250 mentors, this stream also 
includes a community of practice bringing participants together to continue sharing 
their knowledge and skills.
TABLE 8 Locations of Drought Resilience Leaders Development pilot program
NSW
Western New South Wales and North West Slopes & Plains
VIC
Goulburn Valley and Mallee
QLD
Central West and South West Queensland
SA
Eyre Peninsula and Murraylands
WA
Northern Wheatbelt and Gascoyne Murchison
TAS
North East Tasmania
NT
Katherine region

25
Natural Resource Management Drought Resilience Program
Objectives
Program information
The strategy
Make land management practices that improve and sustain the drought resilience of 
agricultural landscapes the norm
What are we trying 
to achieve?
A step-change in awareness, acceptance and adoption of drought resilient land 
management practices among farmers and other land managers
How will this support 
drought resilience?
Careful management of natural capital can make agricultural landscapes more resilient 
to drought, which in turn can support farm productivity and profitability during and 
following droughts
How will we 
assess whether it’s 
successful?
Overall success measures
•	 There’s an increase in land managers trialling and adopting drought resilience 
land management practices (LM 1)
•	 Collaborative networks between farmers and other land managers in support 
of increased adoption of drought resilience land management practices are 
strengthened (LM 2)
•	 The land management practices supported are effective in improving drought 
resilience (LM 3)
TABLE 9 Annual reporting on progress and performance
2020–21 results
2021–22
2022–23
2023–24
80 projects funded 
following competitive 
processes
(LM 1) Grantees’ baseline 
data and targets 
for change in land 
management practices
(LM 1, LM 2) Numbers and 
types of services (activities) 
in grantees’ activity plans
(LM 2) Number of land 
managers and other 
stakeholders engaged 
through grantees’ activities
(LM 3) Grantees’ baseline 
data and early evidence 
of biophysical impacts 
of project activities 
(i.e. improvement in 
natural capital health 
and resilience)
(All measures) Reviewing 
final reporting from 
initial grants (with project 
outcome data)
(All measures) As in 2021–22, 
reporting against activity 
plans and targets
(LM1) Evaluation: case 
studies of land management 
practices trialled
(LM 2) Evaluation: methods 
to assess network strengths 
and role in adoption (applied 
to case studies)
(LM 2, LM 3) Evaluation: 
early evidence of practices 
that may be adopted 
(case studies)
(All measures) As in 2022, 
reviewing final reporting 
from remaining initial grants 
(with project outcome data)
(LM 3) Evaluation: assess 
practices that have been 
or could be adopted; 
generate learning
(All measures) Map project 
outcomes against soil and 
other natural capital data, 
as well as relevant economic 
and social outcomes, to 
begin assessing contributions 
to long-term trends
Better land management
Trial and adoption of land management practices 
that support agricultural landscape resilience

Better land management
26
The Natural Resource Management Drought Resilience Program is providing funding 
for the trial and adoption of on-ground practices that contribute to the drought resilience 
of broader landscapes.
The program was rolled out through 2 streams:
	Î
A landscapes stream, open only to regional NRM bodies
	Î
A grants stream, open to all.
Following a competitive process:
	Î
14 projects were funded under the landscapes stream, amounting to $5.6 million
	Î
66 projects were funded under the grants stream, amounting to $7.8 million.
The successful projects involve:
	Î
testing and demonstrating new farming practices, including the use of different 
pasture/forage varieties and novel grazing strategies
	Î
tracking and forecasting pasture biomass to plan operations and schedule 
decision points
	Î
using drought-tolerant native trees and shrub species as windbreaks
	Î
experimenting with new and innovative ways to maintain continuous perennial 
ground cover
	Î
analysing soil moisture to assist in preparing for and responding to 
drought conditions
	Î
peer-to-peer learning and sharing the latest thinking on drought resilience.
These projects are underway and will be implemented throughout 2021–22. 
The 2021–22 Budget announced a further $23 million in funding for activities improving 
the drought resilience of agricultural landscapes. This process is expected to open in 
November 2021.

Better land management
27
case studies
Natural Resource Management Drought Resilience Program
Landscapes stream – Mallee Catchment Management Authority, Victoria: This $494,000 
project will support the identification and adoption of innovative practices that increase 
local resilience and help mitigate the future effects of drought on the region’s agricultural 
and natural systems. It will deliver targeted engagement and capacity-building activities 
with farmers in the severely drought-affected Millewa-Carwarp district and those managing 
livestock operations in the broader region to enhance awareness of soil erosion risks, 
appropriate interventions to stabilise and reclaim soils in impacted areas, and ongoing 
management practices that provide appropriate levels of protection to high-risk soils in a 
variable climate. Implementation will address the immediate impacts and risks of recent 
conditions by focusing on those parts of the farm that present the greatest challenges 
(e.g. areas first to lose ground cover and expose soils to erosion risk), while also assisting 
farmers to adjust their systems to mitigate the risks posed by future droughts.
This is a collaborative project that successfully demonstrates linkages between farm and 
landscape scales. The focus is on innovative and transformative long-term practice change 
that reduces future risks, rather than short-term actions to ‘survive’ a drought. Public 
good is also addressed through soil stabilisation outcomes in reducing the frequency and 
severity of wind-driven erosion events (i.e. dust storms) and associated off-farm impacts.
Grants stream – Agricultural Bureau of South Australia: This $178,000 project will 
develop farmers’ skills in using innovative tools to identify and overcome soil limitations, 
leading to improved water use efficiency, higher yields and reduced incidence of wind 
erosion, salinity, subsoil constraints and seeps. Tools and new information will be drawn 
from a variety of sources including current research sites funded through a range of 
organisations, and farmer innovations. The project will also develop water security plans 
with farmers, including innovative methods of water capture, storage and reticulation 
allowing improved grazing practices. This will result in less impact on natural watercourses. 
It will also build farmer, industry and community awareness and understanding through 
effective promotion of project activities and findings through social media platforms. 
Participants will be engaged through the Agricultural Bureau of South Australia, which has 
60 farmer branches across the state and 1,100 members.
The project takes an integrated social-ecological system approach that uses innovative 
tools in addressing major soil management issues. It will build the resilience of natural 
capital and stakeholders to drought while also promoting findings and activities and 
helping farmers develop water security plans.

Better land management
28
Stakeholder comments: Farmers and farming groups
‘The Rowsley Valley contains some of the most erosive soil in Victoria. 
Extended periods of drought have increased the rate of erosion on many 
farms which is further exacerbated by lack of ground cover. Thanks to 
funding from the Australian Federal Government, our consortium of farmers 
and environmentally-focused community groups is establishing two demonstration sites that 
will illustrate innovative ways of overcoming substantial soil erosion. We are transforming 
steep, tunnel-eroded grazing land into a shrub/forage grazing site through contour ripping and 
planting to stabilise the soil, and concurrently increasing production through extra grazing 
capacity that can withstand the harsh summer conditions. We are also showcasing how farm 
forestry productivity can be increased while stabilising highly erosive country. Our project aims 
to demonstrate how drought resilient farming practices can concurrently protect the land and 
improve productivity.’’
Dr Jacob Pearce (General Manager), E.M. Lakey & J.V. Pearce, Victoria
‘Our project, funded by the NRM Drought Resilience Program is a trial using drone technology 
for low impact seeding of pastures, rivers and sparely vegetated areas to re-establish ground 
cover, clean waterways, prevent erosion and increase productivity through the creation of 
more drought resilient farms. The funding has allowed us to research and trial new technology 
that will have a major role to play now and in the future. It has allowed us to engage with 
agronomists, seed suppliers, farmers and technology developers to find and develop more 
innovative ways to combat drought.’
Thomas Philip Bannigan (farmer), Central Tablelands, New South Wales
‘The NRM funding from the future drought fund is facilitating our farmer-led production 
group to test and demonstrate farming methods that allow the sharing of knowledge and 
skills to build the confidence of our region’s farmers to better prepare for and respond to dry 
times. The projects are practical, relevant, and accessible to the region’s farmers to assist with 
the building of knowledge, skills, and confidence to facilitate adaptation within their own 
farming systems in ways that will build true resilience and capacity to respond to Australia’s 
variable climate.’
Jen Smith (farmer), Gippsland Agriculture Group, Victoria

29
Progress in building drought 
resilience
The Drought Resilience Funding Plan 2020–2024 sets 3 objectives for the Future 
Drought Fund (FDF):
	Î
Economic resilience – grow the self-reliance and performance (productivity and 
profitability) of the agricultural sector
	Î
Environmental resilience – improve the natural capital of agricultural landscapes 
for better environmental outcomes
	Î
Social resilience – strengthen the wellbeing and social capital of rural, regional and 
remote communities.
The success measures for each theme, described in the preceding section, 
provide confidence on whether FDF investments are contributing to drought resilience. 
But they do not, on their own, tell us what the impact on drought resilience is – that is, 
they are primarily directional in nature .
Measuring drought resilience across economic, environmental and social dimensions 
is a complex task. It requires the development of bespoke indicators and methodologies, 
and the collection of new streams of data. Even more complex is attributing changes 
in drought resilience to particular actions.
A framework is being developed by the Department to attempt to do these things. It is 
set out below, with further details in Appendix A. Almost all of the identified indicators 
require further development (including possible refinement or expansion) and 
validation as part of the next steps.
A priority for 2021–22 is to further develop the framework, in consultation with 
stakeholders. The aim is to have a settled framework in place, with baseline data, 
for the next annual report.
The intent is that this framework will not only support the evaluation of FDF performance 
but also support understanding of broader trends in drought resilience in order to inform 
a wide range of policies, programs and actions by governments, industry and others.

Progress in building drought resilience
30
TABLE 10 Measuring changes in drought resilience
Performance 
Information
Economic resilience
Environmental resilience
Social resilience
Objective
Agricultural businesses are self-reliant, 
productive and profitable in the 
context of drought risks.
Agricultural landscapes are functional 
and sustainable, with healthy natural 
capital, in the context of drought.
Agricultural 
communities are 
resourceful, adaptable 
and thriving in the 
context of drought.
Outcome 
indicators
Farm business drought profit risk 
indicator (ABARES) – measures the 
degree to which farm business profit 
would be expected to fall in the event 
of a drought.
Total factor productivity growth 
(ABARES) – comparing productivity 
growth with and without adjustment 
for climate volatility provides an 
indication of whether productivity 
is becoming less impacted by 
climate factors.
Ground cover and vegetation 
cover indices (ABARES) – provides 
an indication of the environmental 
resilience of agricultural landscapes 
(e.g. risk of soil erosion, soil water 
infiltration, soil carbon).
Community capital 
index and social 
capital index 
(Regional Wellbeing 
Survey) – provides 
measures of capacity 
to adapt to challenges 
and change, through 
community activity, 
services and 
decision-making.
Output 
indicators
Percentage of farmers with a written 
farm plan (ABARES).
Combined planning index (Regional 
Wellbeing Survey) – percentage 
of farmers who had a farm plan 
containing strategies for coping with 
drought, addressed other risks in 
their plan, and actively used their plan 
to make decisions.
NRM and farm management 
practices (ABARES) – use of farm 
management practices for drought 
resilience.
NRM and farm management practices 
(ABARES) – use of farm management 
practices for drought resilience.
Community attitudes 
towards drought 
preparedness – 
awareness and 
attitudes towards 
drought, accounting for 
drought conditions.
Community action on 
drought preparedness 
– extent of the reach 
and drought-related 
activities of community 
organisations, 
networks and leaders.
Future 
Drought Fund 
contributing 
inputs
Increase in the skills and confidence of 
farmers to manage risk (RM 1)
Increase in farm business plans that 
consider drought risks (RM 2)
Increase in agricultural regions that 
have drought resilience plans (RM 4)
Climate information used to inform 
decisions (CI 1)
More farmers are taking actions to 
manage risk, including drought (RM 3)
of, and capacity to use and adopt, 
knowledge that can be applied to 
improve drought resilience (HI 1)
Increased adoption and 
commercialisation of drought resilience 
technologies and practices (HI 2)
Increase in land managers trialling 
and adopting drought resilience land 
management practices (LM 1)
Stronger collaborative networks 
between farmers and other land 
managers in support of increased 
adoption of drought resilience land 
management practices (LM 2)
Increase in agricultural regions that 
have drought resilience plans (RM 4)
of, and capacity to use and adopt, 
knowledge that can be applied to 
improve drought resilience (HI 1)
Increased adoption and 
commercialisation of drought 
resilience technologies and practices 
(HI 2)
Increase in the reach 
and activities of 
community leaders, 
mentors, networks and 
organisations driving 
action on drought 
resilience (RC 1)
Change in awareness 
of and attitudes to 
drought preparedness 
at the community level 
(RC 2)
Increase in the number 
of agricultural regions 
that have drought 
resilience plans (RM 4)

31
Future Drought Fund 
administration
The Future Drought Fund Act 2019 establishes the Future Drought Fund (FDF), invested 
by the Future Fund Board of Guardians. The FDF was initially $3.968 billion and will 
grow to $5 billion through investment activities. As at 30 June 2021 the balance of the 
FDF was $4.601 billion. The investment performance of the FDF is not the subject of this 
report. The Future Fund Board of Guardians reports regularly on the performance of all 
funds under its management.
Each year, starting in 2020–21, $100 million is made available to the Future Drought 
Fund for drought resilience programs.
Water and the Environment are responsible for the design and delivery of programs 
to build drought resilience funded from the Future Drought Fund, supported by the 
independent, expert-based Future Drought Fund Consultative Committee (see below).
in the context of federal budget processes. Design of programs is guided by the 4-year 
Drought Resilience Funding Plan 2020–2024. The Funding Plan was developed by 
the Consultative Committee after extensive research and stakeholder consultation. 
The committee consulted with more than 690 people to inform development of the plan. 
The plan took effect on 12 February 2020.
The minister must also, under the FDF Act, seek advice from the Consultative Committee 
on whether the design of each program is consistent with the Funding Plan. In practice 
the Consultative Committee is actively engaged with the Future Drought Fund, and 
the department works closely with the committee to develop and deliver proposed 
FDF programs.
A priority for the department in the foundation year has been to put in place governance 
arrangements to support the effective administration of FDF programs. This includes:
	Î
an FDF Risk Management Framework, and risk management plans for each program 
and major activity
	Î
an FDF Probity, Accountability and Transparency Framework, and probity plans for 
each program and major activity
	Î
arrangements for legislative governance setting out processes to ensure compliance 
with the FDF Act and other legislation. 
	Î
an FDF Compliance and Assurance Framework, to support oversight of the 
appropriate use of FDF funds by third parties.
	Î
a memorandum of understanding between the department and the Regional 
Investment Corporation (RIC) Board to facilitate the role of the RIC Board in 
providing advice under the FDF Act.

Future Drought Fund administration
32
FDF programs are delivered by the department using grant and procurement processes 
governed by the Commonwealth Grants Rules and Guidelines and the Commonwealth 
Procurement Rules. Some programs are also being delivered through Federation 
Funding Agreements with state and territory governments. In 2020–21 the department 
delivered FDF programs through:
	Î
4 competitive grant programs
	Î
5 tender processes
	Î
2 Federation Funding Agreements, each with 8 schedules setting out delivery 
arrangements in each state and territory.
Before entering into any funding arrangement, the minister (or delegate) must seek 
advice from the RIC Board. This serves as a final check and balance on spending from 
the Future Drought Fund.
The Future Drought Fund Consultative Committee
The independent Future Drought Fund Consultative Committee was established in 
September 2019. It comprises experts in fields including agricultural economics, climate risk, 
rural and regional development and natural resource management.
The Consultative Committee is chaired by Mr Brent Finlay. Committee members are 
Dr Kate Andrews, Dr Wendy Craik AM, Dr Elizabeth Peterson and Ms Caroline Welsh. 
More information is in Minister Littleproud’s media release on the Future Drought 
Consultative Committee.
In 2019–20 the Consultative Committee led the consultation across Australia to develop 
the Drought Resilience Funding Plan 2020–2024.
In 2020–21 the Consultative Committee met 12 times. Discussions covered topics such as:
	Î the design and delivery of FDF programs and consistency with the Funding Plan
	Î progress being made towards achieving the Funding Plan’s strategic priorities 
and objectives
	Î monitoring, evaluation and learning arrangements for FDF programs
	Î stakeholder engagement approaches and feedback
	Î communications strategies
	Î risks to FDF delivery and management strategies.
The committee, primarily through its chair, also met regularly with stakeholders to discuss 
the Future Drought Fund and its programs and hear a wide range of perspectives on 
its activities.

Future Drought Fund administration
33
Allocation and spending of funding to date
While not required by the FDF Act, the government’s approach is to consider annually, 
as part of each federal budget process, FDF programs to build drought resilience. 
This supports an adaptive approach to FDF delivery, informed by ongoing review, 
reporting, engagement and learning.
The programs in the first round, announced in 2020–21, were intentionally designed 
to be short term and foundationally focused. They accounted for the full $100 million 
available in 2020–21, and in once instance included allocations in future years out 
to 2023–24.
A second round of programs was announced in the 2021-22 Budget, building on the 
foundation year programs. In most cases, these programs allocate funds over a 3-year 
period, from 2021–22 to 2023–24.
Further allocations from the Future Drought Fund are expected to be considered in 
the 2022–23 budget process.
The Regional Investment Corporation Board
The Regional Investment Corporation (RIC) is a corporate Commonwealth entity governed 
by an independent board .
The RIC Board plays a role in the governance arrangements for the Future Drought Fund. 
Under section 28 of the FDF Act, the RIC Board must provide advice to the relevant minister 
about whether a proposed arrangement, grant or agreement should be made. In 2020–21 
the RIC Board considered 8 such requests. This involved 80 open competitive grants, 
2 open competitive processes delivering devolved grants, 8 targeted competitive grants, 
2 open competitive procurements, 2 targeted competitive procurements, and 2 rounds of 
state/territory grants via the Federal Financial Relationships Framework.

Future Drought Fund administration
34
2020–21 funding
All of the $100 million made available from the Future Drought Fund in 2020–21 has 
been allocated to programs.
Of that $100 million, $79.828 million has been contracted, with the balance relating to:
	Î
an innovation grants process currently underway – the government announced in 
the 2021–22 Budget that it will combine 2020–21 funding with additional funding in 
future financial years to support a larger and longer innovation grants process than 
originally contemplated
	Î
the expansion of the Southern Queensland–Northern NSW Drought Resilience 
Adoption and Innovation Hub to include an additional node in Armidale – a process to 
contract this funding was ongoing at the end of the 2020–21 financial year.
Of the $79.828  million contracted, $65.127 million had been spent at the end of the 
2020–21 financial year. The balance relates to contracts that have milestone payments 
in 2021–22.
TABLE 11 FDF funding allocated, contracted and expensed, 2020–21
Theme
Initial 
Allocation
($’000)
Final 
Allocation
($’000)
Contracted
($’000)
Expensed
($’000)
Harnessing innovation
30,800
18,385
16,385
16,380
Drought Resilience Adoption and 
Innovation Hubs
16,000
18,000 b
16,000 a
16,000
Drought Resilience Innovation Grants
14,170
0
0
0
Drought Resilience Research and 
Adoption Investment Plan
500
235
235
235
Science to Practice forum
130
150
150
145
Better risk management
30,000
25,818
25,818
25,818
Farm Business Resilience Program
20,000
15,965
15,965
15,965
Regional Drought Resilience Planning
10,000
9,853
9,853
9,853
Better climate information
13,000
13,000
13,000
4,940
Climate Services for Agriculture
10,000
10,000
10,000
3,500
Drought Resilience Self-Assessment Tool
3,000
3,000
3,000
1,440
More resilient communities
11,200
11,200
11,196
11,196
Drought Resilient Leaders
7,450
7,450
7,446
7,446
Networks to Build Drought Resilience
3,750
3,750
3,750
3,750
Better land management
15,000
13,429
13,429
6,793
Natural Resource Management Drought 
Resilience Program – Grants
10,000
7,807
7,806
1,171 c
National Resource Management Drought 
Resilience Program – Landscapes
5,000
5,622
5,622
5,622
Totals
100,000
81,832 b
79,828
65,127 c
a The Drought Resilience Adoption and Innovation Hubs have been contracted for $64 million over 2020–21 to 2023–24. 
The table only captures the use of the $100 million available in 2020–21. b Differences between initial allocations and 
final allocations reflects reallocations of funding: $2 million additional to expand one of the Drought Resilience Adoption 
and Innovation Hubs; $18.168 million for Drought Resilience Innovation Grants, with this funding moved into 2021–22 
(see table 12). c 2020–21 funding that has not been spent in 2020-21 will be moved into 2021-22 as part of the Mid-Year 
Fiscal and Economic Outlook process.

Future Drought Fund administration
35
Future year funding
In addition to the $100 million in 2020–21, the government has allocated $218.5 million 
to FDF programs over the period 2021–22 to 2023–24. This takes total allocations 
for FDF programs to $318.5 million over the period 2020–21 to 2023–24. This leaves 
$81.5 million available to be allocated by the government across 2022–23 and 2023–24, 
and $100 million each year beyond this.
TABLE 12 FDF future funding
Program
2020–21
($’000)
2021–22
($’000)
2022–23
($’000)
2023–24
($’000)
Total
($’000)
Harnessing innovation
18,385
49,668
26,500
26,500
121,053
Drought Resilience Innovation Grants 
–
24,168
5,000
5,000
34,168
Drought Resilience Adoption and 
Innovation Hub projects
–
4,000
–
–
4,000
Adoption officers 
–
3,000
3,000
3,000
9,000
National enabling activities
385
2,500
2,500
2,500
7,885
Drought Resilience Adoption and 
Innovation Hubs 
18,000
16,000
16,000
16,000
66,000
Better risk management
25,818
39,000
31,000
21,000
116,818
Farm Business Resilience Program
15,965
25,000
20,000
15,000
75,965
Regional Drought Resilience Planning
9,853
14,000
11,000
6,000
40,853
Better climate information
13,000
7,500
2,500
2,000
25,000
Climate Services for Agriculture
10,000
5,000
–
–
15,000
Drought Resilience Self-Assessment Tool
3,000
2,500
2,500
2,000
10,000
More resilient communities
11,200
5,000
1,500
1,500
19,200
Drought Resilient Leaders
7,450
1,000
1,500
1,500
11,450
Networks to Build Drought Resilience
3,750
4,000
7,750
Better land management
13,429
17,000
3,000
3,000
36,429
Drought Resilience NRM 
13,429
–
–
–
13,429
Drought Resilient Agricultural Landscapes
–
17,000
3,000
3,000
23,000
Totals
81,832 a 118,168 a
64,500
54,000 318,500
a This table reflects the movement of $18.168 million from 2020–21 to 2021–22, associated with the Drought Resilience 
Innovation Grants. A further $16.7 million will be moved from 2020–21 into 2021–22 as part of the Mid-Year Fiscal and 
Economic Outlook process. This funding reflects contracts entered into in 2020–21, with payment milestones in 2021–22.

Future Drought Fund administration
36
Monitoring, evaluation and learning
Monitoring, evaluation, reporting and learning are fundamental to delivery of the 
Future Drought Fund.
During 2020–21 a Future Drought Fund Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning 
Framework (MEL Framework) was established. It is designed to monitor the 
effectiveness of each program in achieving its outcomes, as well as whether the 
Future Drought Fund as a whole is achieving the triple bottom line objectives set out 
in the Funding Plan of increasing economic, social and environmental resilience.
The MEL Framework commits to:
	Î
each program having
\
a monitoring, evaluation and learning plan that sets out targeted outcomes, 
a program logic explaining how activities are expected to lead to the targeted 
outcomes, and indicators for measuring and monitoring success
\
a mid-term and end-of-program evaluation
	Î
for the Future Drought Fund as a whole
\
the development of indicators to monitor performance of FDF programs, as a 
whole, in contributing to the Funding Plan objectives of improved economic, 
environmental and social resilience
\
an annual report to communicate and support feedback on activities 
and performance.
In addition, the FDF Act establishes a 4-year review cycle:
	Î
The funding plan that guides FDF programs runs for a maximum of 4 years – 
the current plan will expire on 12 February 2024 (unless replaced earlier).
	Î
Within 3 years of a funding plan commencing (by 12 February 2023 for the current 
plan), a referral must be made to the Productivity Commission requesting that it 
review the effectiveness of the funding plan and FDF programs.
	Î
The Productivity Commission must report no later than 5 months before the expiry 
of the funding plan (12 September 2023 for the current plan).
	Î
A new funding plan must be developed before the existing funding plan expires, 
guided by the Consultative Committee and with public consultation.
The MEL Framework and plans are being designed and developed in a way that will 
support the regular Productivity Commission review.
This annual report and the performance measurement framework it presents are 
key parts of operationalising the MEL Framework. We will continue to develop, review 
and improve these frameworks over time, including with input from stakeholders 
during 2021–22.

Future Drought Fund administration
37
Consultation and engagement
Consultation and engagement with stakeholders is fundamental to delivery of the 
Future Drought Fund.
The Consultative Committee (primarily through its chair) and the department meet 
regularly with stakeholders to discuss the Future Drought Fund and its programs. 
In 2020–21 this involved more than 40 stakeholder meetings. Currently 1,270 people 
are registered to receive regular updates on the Future Drought Fund, and 29 updates 
were circulated during 2020–21.
Moving forward, we will establish a more formalised cycle of consultation and 
engagement, complementing ongoing ad hoc engagement.
1 	 Each year (around October), we will publish and present an annual report to 
communicate about activities, progress and performance.
2 	 Following this, we will undertake a consultation process to seek feedback and 
other input. This will include an opportunity to put forward ideas for potential FDF 
investment. This input will help to inform reporting to government as part of the 
annual federal budget process, and decisions about allocations from the Future 
Drought Fund to drought resilience programs.
3 	 Following the Budget, we will proactively communicate about any new or 
changed programs.
4 	 Stakeholders will be engaged in the delivery of programs – for example, consulting 
on design details and on communications to support grant and other processes.
This annual cycle will be complemented by the 4-yearly review cycle described above – 
that is, a Productivity Commission review followed by a refresh of the Drought Resilience 
Funding Plan, both involving consultation and engagement processes.
These consultation and engagement arrangements will be tested and refined 
during 2021–22.

38
Appendix A: Potential measures 
of drought resilience
TABLE A1 Potential measures identified
Measure
Detail of measure
Method, source, links
Farm business drought risk
Farm business drought 
profit risk indicator 
(national broadacre 
average, annual)
The farm business drought profit 
risk indicator is a long run metric 
measuring the degree to which farm 
profits would fall in the event of 
drought, as a percentage change.
The indicator uses farm profit and 
household income to gauge the effect 
of ‘drought years’ compared with 
‘normal years’, over time.
ABARES analysis and use of the farmpredict model 
incorporating data from the ABARES broadacre farm 
survey (ABARES Australian Agricultural and Grazing 
Industry Survey). The model takes into account 
details of farm performance, commodity prices, 
costs of inputs and outputs, rainfall, temperature, 
soil moisture and other climate parameters from 
the Bureau of Meteorology at individual farm scale. 
Results are aggregated to give results regionally 
(ABARES region and Australian Bureau of Statistics 
Statistical Area 4) and by sector, using ABARES farm 
weights. Refer to ABARES Research Report 20.17 
(2020) for detailed methodology of the analysis to 
2018–19, which was updated and re-run to 2019–20 
in early 2021.
Climate adjusted total factor productivity
Climate adjusted total 
factor productivity 
growth per year 
(average previous 
10 years, annual 
update)
Climate adjusted total factor 
productivity growth indicates 
technological change and innovations 
in the production process, adjusted 
to remove the short-term influence 
of climate volatility to measure 
underlying productivity performance.
Climate adjusted productivity estimates are key 
measures of farm performance. They measure 
the efficiency with which farmers use inputs (such 
as seed, fertiliser and fodder) to produce outputs 
(such as crops and livestock). Productivity growth 
measures technological change and innovations in 
the production process.
Explore productivity estimates in the ABARES 
Productivity Data Dashboard, with links to methods.
continued ...

Appendix A: Potential measures of drought resilience
39
continued ...
continued
TABLE A1 Potential measures identified
Measure
Detail of measure
Method, source, links
Farm planning and management practices
Percentage of farmers 
with a written farm 
plan (annual)
The proportion of farmers with a 
written farm plan with business 
objectives (national average for 
broadacre cropping and livestock, 
dairy, horticulture, and sugar).
ABARES commissioned survey of farm practices 
with a national sample size of 2,355 farmers in 
2021. The survey was developed to gauge current 
practices related to natural resource management 
(NRM) and drought resilience and preparedness. 
The survey used a stratified sample to represent 
agriculture sectors nationally and to state level, 
covering farms with an estimated value of 
agricultural operations of $40,000 or more. 
The total sample in 2021 comprised broadacre 
grazing livestock and cropping (1,530 farmers), 
dairy (201), horticulture (425) and sugar (and other 
livestock) sectors (199).
The ABARES survey source is used here because 
of its greater representation of farmers across 
all states compared with the Regional Wellbeing 
Survey (RWS).
See the ABARES 2021 survey results dashboard, 
available in November 2021.
Combined planning 
index (annual 
or biennial)
The combined planning index 
measures the percentage of farmers 
surveyed, or for whom the index could 
be calculated, who met all 3 of these 
criteria: their farm plan had strategies 
for coping with drought; it covered a 
range of other risks; they actively used 
it to make decisions.
The practices are applicable to all farm 
types and are also reported separately.
RWS and ABARES 2021 survey. Important factors 
around farm planning and sub-components linked to 
building resilience have been informed by research 
by the University of Canberra.
In 2020 the RWS sample of farmers that this index 
could be calculated for was 1,429. Some farmers 
have a plan and have discussed it with others, but 
it is not written down. Questions on planning and 
drought are generally asked biennially in the RWS.
The ABARES survey covered 2,355 farmers. 
The combined index from this source is for 
farmers who had a written farm plan with 
business objectives.

Appendix A: Potential measures of drought resilience
40
TABLE A1 Potential measures identified
Measure
Detail of measure
Method, source, links
Ground cover
Australian 
agricultural land
The metrics reported are based on 
maintaining the proportion of area 
of Australia’s agricultural land with 
sufficient vegetation cover to protect 
soils against erosion above the lowest 
(10th percentile) results previously 
observed in the archive.
Australia’s agricultural area is calculated according 
to available land use and forest maps and 
classifications as at 2018, based on a mosaic of 
mapping dates and scales. For an explanation of 
this and other method details, see Setting targets 
for National Landcare Program monitoring and 
reporting vegetation cover for Australia (2020).
The proportion of Australia’s agricultural area 
protected from erosion across Australia is usually 
lowest in January. Therefore, this measure is a useful 
indicator of erosion risk between years.
ABARES analysis of monthly total vegetation cover 
from MODIS satellite imagery at 500 m x 500 m 
resolution (using the Rangelands and Pasture 
Productivity online monitoring tool (RaPP Map).
Percentage of 
Australian agricultural 
land protected from 
wind erosion (annual, 
in January)
Proportion of agricultural area across 
Australia. For each pixel, a threshold of 
at least 50% ground cover is required 
to protect soil from wind erosion.
ABARES is developing metrics suitable for long-
term monitoring compared to a baseline at the start 
of the Future Drought Fund (FDF), with this work 
building on monitoring work under the National 
Landcare Program (Regional Land Partnerships).
Percentage of 
Australian agricultural 
land protected from 
water erosion (annual, 
in January)
Proportion of agricultural area across 
Australia. For each pixel, a threshold of 
at least 70% ground cover is required 
to protect soil from water erosion. 
At least 80% ground cover is required 
for high-risk areas with steep slopes, 
high rainfall or erodible soils.
ABARES is developing metrics suitable for long-term 
monitoring compared to a baseline at the start of 
the FDF, with this work building on monitoring work 
under the National Landcare Program (Regional 
Land Partnerships).
Number of months 
in a year that wind 
erosion targets were 
met nationally (annual)
Number of months in which the 
proportion of agricultural area across 
Australia protected from wind erosion 
was above the target (58% protected).
Annual target for agricultural land is that every 
month, 58% or more is protected from wind 
erosion, with at least 50% total vegetation cover 
each pixel. These values are set based on the 10th 
percentile of the MODIS-derived monthly fractional 
cover archive from January 2001 to December 2019.
Number of months 
in a year that water 
erosion targets 
were met, nationally 
(annual)
Number of months in which the 
proportion of agricultural area across 
Australia protected from water erosion 
was above the target (29% protected).
Annual target for agricultural land is that every 
month, 29% or more is protected from water 
erosion, with at least 70% total vegetation cover on 
each pixel. These values are set based on the 10th 
percentile of the MODIS-derived monthly fractional 
cover archive from January 2001 to December 2019.
continued ...
continued

Appendix A: Potential measures of drought resilience
41
TABLE A1 Potential measures identified
Measure
Detail of measure
Method, source, links
Natural resource 
management regions 
meeting targets for 
area protected from 
wind or water erosion, 
for 12 months of the 
year (annual)
Proportion of NRM regions (with valid 
targets) that were above target for all 
of previous 12 months. Appropriate 
targets vary by region. Targets based 
on either wind erosion protection 
(50% total vegetation cover) or water 
erosion protection (70% or 80% total 
vegetation cover) have been used.
54 NRM regions have targets to maintain the 
proportion of area of agriculture protected from 
wind and or water erosion in all months of the year 
(by maintaining 50%, 70% or 80% total vegetation 
cover as appropriate for that region, based on the 
10th percentile of the MODIS-derived fractional 
cover archive from January 2001 to December 2019). 
To pass, all valid targets for that region must be met 
in all 12 months.
Natural resource management and farm practices
Percentage of farmers 
who destock early to 
maintain ground cover
Percentage of farmers 
who increase on-farm 
water storage (annual)
Percentage of farmers 
reducing long-term 
stocking rates (annual)
Percentage of 
farmers using more 
water-efficient crop 
or pasture varieties 
(annual)
Percentage of farmers 
increasing fodder and 
grain storage (annual)
Farmers were asked whether they 
had used these specific practices, 
as a routine part of their farm 
management, over the last 3 years.
Other measures and farming practices 
surveyed with expected links to 
drought resilience were:
•	 improving soil water retention
•	 use of carbon-farming or 
sequestration
•	 optimising pesticide or fertiliser use.
ABARES 2021 survey (see ‘Farm planning and 
management practices’ in this table for details and 
coverage).
The set of measures has been developed building 
on research by the University of Canberra (Regional 
Wellbeing Survey) on NRM and associated potential 
resilience measures for farmers.
Estimates in the ABARES 2021 survey for these 
measures are the percentage of farms that used the 
practice, of those farms that could use the practice 
(e.g. the question about destocking was not asked of 
horticulture farms).
Farmers were also asked in this survey how 
important different motivations were, such as to 
increase drought resilience or because of personal, 
environmental or financial considerations.
Explore the ABARES 2021 survey results.
Social capital index
Social capital index for 
general population, 
nationally (annual)
Social capital index 
for farmers, nationally 
(annual)
This index equally combines 3 
components of the RWS, measuring 
the extent to which respondents:
•	 volunteer regularly in their 
local community
•	 feel welcome in their local 
community (sense of belonging)
•	 regularly engage in local events and 
networking (including online).
The index is rated on a scale from 1 to 
7 and can be compared at regional 
scale for the general population and 
state scale for farmers.
Managed by the University of Canberra since 2013, 
the annual RWS covers up to 13,000 residents 
across rural Australia, including non-farmers and 
around 3,000 farmers. The sample is recruited using 
a range of methods including emails to participants 
in previous surveys, direct mail to a selection of 
households, social media advertising, and a survey 
panel provider. Data from the survey is weighted 
to be representative of the adult population of 
Australia (similar to Australian Bureau of Statistics 
survey methods). The RWS examines factors 
influencing wellbeing, liveability and resilience of 
farmers and regional communities.
The RWS provides a view of residents’ experience 
of their local community dynamics, which is 
a different perspective to that of census data. 
Another advantage is that annual collection enables 
tracking changes over a shorter period.
continued ...
continued

Appendix A: Potential measures of drought resilience
42
TABLE A1 Potential measures identified
Measure
Detail of measure
Method, source, links
Community capital index
Community capital 
index for general 
population, nationally 
(annual)
Community capital 
index for farmers, 
nationally (annual)
This index equally combines 4 
components of the RWS, measuring 
respondents’ agreement to:
•	 their local community being a 
safe place to live
•	 having good access to general 
health services in their local 
community
•	 having good access to local 
government services in their 
local community
•	 having confidence in the 
effectiveness of local governance.
The index is rated on a scale from 1 to 
7 and can be compared at regional 
scale for the general population and at 
state scale for farmers.
See ‘Social capital index’ above.
continued

43
Glossary
Acronym/term
Meaning
ABARES
Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics 
and Sciences
BOM
Bureau of Meteorology
CSA
Climate Services for Agriculture
CSIRO
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation
Consultative Committee Future Drought Fund Consultative Committee
DAWE
department
DRSAT
Drought Resilience Self-Assessment Tool
FDF
Future Drought Fund
The Future Drought Fund is a suite of programs, funded through 
to 2023–24, that will continue to provide farmers and regional 
and rural communities with the tools they need for building 
drought resilience.
FDF Act
Future Drought Fund Act 2019
FRRR
Foundation for Rural and Regional Renewal
Funding Plan
Drought Resilience Funding Plan 2020–2024
hub
Drought Resilience Adoption and Innovation Hub
MEL Framework
Future Drought Funding Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning 
Framework
NRM
natural resource management
Productivity 
Commission
independent research and advisory body on a range of economic, 
social and environmental issues affecting the welfare of Australians.
RIC
Regional Investment Corporation
RDEA&C
research, development, extension, adoption and commercialisation
RWS
Regional Wellbeing Survey

44
References
DAWE 2020, Future Drought Fund Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Framework, 
and Preparedness Plan, Canberra, November.
Future Drought Fund Act 2019, No. 55, 2019.
Peel, D and Schirmer, J 2021, Drought resilience indicators provided to the Department 
of Agriculture, Water and the Environment (unpublished report prepared for the 
Commonwealth of Australia 2021, Budget 2021–22: Securing Australia’s recovery – 
Building a more secure and resilient Australia, ‘Preparing for future droughts’, Canberra.

References
46
awe.gov.au/fdf
ADA369.0921