1 
March 2026 – Version 1.0 
Future Drought Fund policy guidance 
Purpose 
Delivery partners have a responsibility to understand the Future Drought Fund (Drought Resilience Funding 
Plan 2024-2028) Determination 2024 (Funding Plan (2024-2028)) and ensure their work aligns with the 
funding principles. This guide is intended to assist current and prospective Future Drought Fund (FDF) 
delivery partners to understand their obligations, roles and responsibilities under the Funding Plan (2024-
2028) and ensure compliance with legislative requirements. 
This guide should be read alongside the Funding Plan (2024-2028) and Explanatory Statement. 
The term ‘delivery partner’ refers to all individuals, businesses, organisations and other entities, government 
and non-government, involved in delivery of FDF funded activities (including devolved arrangements and 
grants). 
The Drought Resilience Funding Plan 
The FDF was established by the Future Drought Fund Act 2019 (the Act) to provide secure, continuous 
funding for initiatives that support Australian farmers and regional communities to prepare for, and become 
more resilient to, the impacts of future droughts. 
Under the Act, the Drought Minister is required to issue a Drought Resilience Funding Plan (the Funding 
Plan), which is a legislative instrument under the Act that provides a high-level, principles-based framework 
to guide all funding decisions from the FDF Special Account. This means the design and delivery of FDF 
programs as well as any arrangements and grants (including devolved arrangements and grants) made under 
the programs must comply with the Funding Plan that is in force. 
The Funding Plan does not specify programs, activities or delivery partners. Instead, it contains mandatory 
requirements for all spending from the FDF Special Account. For example, under the current Funding Plan 
(2024-2028) activities must deliver a public good and cannot provide in-drought assistance to directly 
address hardship (funding principles (3)(b) and (3)(c), respectively). 
Every 4 years, the Funding Plan is reviewed and renewed to ensure FDF activities reflect the needs and lived 
experiences of farmers and their communities in building drought and climate resilience. Each new Funding 
Plan is an opportunity for the government of the day to set out its priorities for the FDF. These are informed 
by a legislated quadrennial Productivity Commission review and stakeholder consultation on the forthcoming 
FDF investment. The current Funding Plan (2024-2028) commenced on 9 February 2024 following public 
consultation and broad stakeholder support. 
Both the Act and the Funding Plan (2024-2028) have accompanying explanatory material to support interpretation of 
requirements, including the funding principles.

2 
Funding principles 
The Funding Plan (2024-2028) has 2 types of funding principles to guide FDF spending: 
Fund wide principles (s 6(2)) 
The first set of 11 principles guides decisions about the mix of FDF programs that will provide the greatest 
benefit for the community. These principles also provide guidance relevant to the design of individual 
arrangements and grants. While the fund wide principles are not mandatory, for every arrangement/grant, 
you should consider relevant opportunities for alignment. The Fund wide principles can be found in section 
6(2) of the Funding Plan (2024-2028). 
Principles relating to decisions about arrangements and grants (s 6(3)) 
The second set of 8 principles are mandatory requirements which all arrangements and grants must meet, 
including devolved arrangements and grants. All partners that deliver FDF activities must ensure that they 
align with these principles. Principles relating to decisions about arrangements and grants are provided in All 
funding decisions from 9 February 2024 must be consistent with the current Funding Plan (2024 2028). 
Table 1 along with suggested considerations to ensure alignment. 
All funding decisions from 9 February 2024 must be consistent with the current Funding Plan (2024 2028). 
Table 1 Principles relating to decisions about arrangements and grants and considerations for 
alignment of activities with the funding principles 
Principles relating to decisions about 
arrangements and grants (s 6(3)) 
How the proposed arrangement(s) and/or grant(s) meets the 
funding principle 
(a) 
be consistent with the vision, aim and 
strategic objectives (to build economic, 
environmental and social resilience) 
outlined in this Plana. 
a. The vision, aim and strategic objectives 
are outlined in s 3, 4 and 5 of the Funding 
Plan (2024-2028) 
In relation to drought, including the impacts of climate change, 
consider how the proposed arrangement(s) and/or grant(s), will build 
resilience. Suggested considerations:  
How will the arrangement/grant grow the productivity and self-
reliance of the agricultural sector? 
How will the arrangement/grant improve the function of 
agricultural landscapes through effective management of the 
natural resource base? 
How will the arrangement/grant strengthen the social capital, 
wellbeing and connectedness of rural, regional and remote 
agricultural communities? For example, does it include project 
groups that meet regularly? 
(b) 
ensure activities deliver a public good 
Consider how the proposed arrangement(s) and/or grant(s), will 
support benefits that can be accessed or shared by many. 
Considerations include: 
What kind of change is intended to be achieved? 
Are there significant ‘spill over benefits’ to the broader region or 
industry by the proposed activity? 
Will the information learnt be shared to others? If so, how? For 
example, on the internet or at conferences. 
How will the arrangement/grant achieve value for money? Will 
the benefits achievable from the funding outweigh the costs? 
How will the arrangement/grant maximise the impact of 
activities across Australia?

3 
(c) 
not provide in-drought assistance to 
directly address hardship 
Consider how the proposed arrangement(s) and/or grant(s), focuses 
on drought preparedness and resilience as opposed to in-drought 
hardship assistance. 
Some examples of in-drought assistance to directly address hardship 
include: 
payments to alleviate existing financial hardship 
delivery of water to individuals or communities to alleviate 
hardship associated with having insufficient water for amenities. 
(d) 
actively encourage participation of a 
diverse range of people, businesses and 
landscapes involved in the agricultural 
sector and rural, regional and remote 
communities, including First Nations 
people 
Consider who the proposed arrangement(s) and/or grant(s), is 
targeted at and how it will engage a diverse range of participants. 
Where relevant, consider how the arrangement/grant will engage 
with First Nations stakeholders and how this engagement aligns with 
priorities in the Closing the Gap National Agreement. 
(e) 
foster collaboration to improve 
integration, coordination, 
communication, planning and 
implementation of drought resilience 
activities, and avoid unnecessary 
duplication 
Consider how the proposed arrangement(s) and/or grant(s), will align 
with and leverage existing policies, programs, user knowledge and 
networks where possible. Questions to consider: 
How will the arrangement/grant foster collaboration? For 
instance, will it be co-designed? 
How will the arrangement/grant avoid unnecessary duplication? 
Does the arrangement/grant present a perceived or actual 
duplication? If so, how will duplication be avoided while 
supporting complementary investment? 
Example of government initiatives and strategies that may present a 
perceived duplication include the National Soil Action Plan 2023 to 
2028, National Heritage Trust, Disaster Ready Fund, and state and 
territory government programs.  
(f) 
be designed to deliver efficient and 
effective outcomes for stakeholders 
Consider how the proposed arrangement(s) and/or grant(s) delivers 
efficient and effective outcomes for stakeholders. For instance: 
Will it support a place-based approach to building drought 
resilience? 
Will it be co-designed? 
Are participants able to provide free, prior and informed 
consent?  
Will experts with the relevant skills be engaged? 
Have stakeholder views been considered? 
Are there any timing considerations? 
Will it leverage existing work? 
(g) 
ensure data and knowledge obtained 
from activities under the fund is shared 
and freely made available in the public 
domain 
Suggested considerations: 
how the data and knowledge will be shared with the public. For 
instance, is there a requirement to publish results on the 
internet, hold events or present at conferences? 
where relevant, how you are engaging with matters related to 
Indigenous Cultural and Intellectual Property (ICIP). Importantly: 
− this principle is not a barrier to providing protections for ICIP. 
ICIP should only be shared with the free, prior and informed consent 
of the owners. 
− this principle does not create a barrier with respect to 
recognising Indigenous Data Sovereignty. 
how you will manage any pre-existing intellectual property that 
feeds into the arrangement(s) and/or grant(s) activities or 
outputs.

4 
(h) 
ensure planned monitoring, evaluation, 
and learning activities are efficient, robust 
and in alignment with fund level 
monitoring, evaluation and learning 
(MEL) expectations 
Develop MEL plans early with delivery partners, where relevant, to 
ensure commitment and co-ownership of the MEL process. Questions 
to consider: 
What MEL guidance is required? 
What MEL commitments need to be included in applications? 
How will MEL plans and approaches be communicated and 
designed with stakeholders? 
What MEL activities will take place and when? How will data be 
collected? 
How will these activities align with the FDF MEL Framework and 
theory of change? 
Frequently asked questions 
Why do we need to align with the Funding Plan? 
The Funding Plan is a legislative instrument that ensures the Fund is operating as intended, effectively and 
efficiently – it is a key mechanism for ensuring accountability and the responsible use of public resources. 
Aligning with the Funding Plan improves the FDF’s capacity to deliver on its aim to build drought and climate 
resilience for the public good of the Australian agricultural sector, landscapes, and communities. Without 
proper alignment with the Funding Plan, the effectiveness of the FDF and its initiatives would be jeopardised. 
Do the funding principles apply to devolved arrangements and grants? 
Yes, the principles apply to all funding decisions from the FDF, which include devolved arrangements and 
grants. All partners delivering FDF activities must ensure that they do so consistently with the funding 
principles. 
Do the current funding principles apply to programs implemented under the 
previous Funding Plan? 
All programs, financial arrangements and contracts in place prior to 9 February 2024 are consistent with the 
previous Future Drought Fund (Drought Resilience Funding Plan 2020 to 2024) Determination 2020. 
Funding decisions regarding these programs made after 9 February 2024, including contract variations that 
extend foundational programs, must comply with the current Funding Plan (2024-2028). 
Do the funding principles apply to communications products? 
Yes, in addition to relevant branding and co-branding requirements, communications products should align 
with the Funding Plan (2024-2028) and its funding principles. Communications products must be consistent 
with the principles relating to decisions about arrangements and grants (s 6 (3)). 
Although not mandatory, the fund wide principles (s 6 (2)) should also be considered when developing 
communications materials to guide consistent FDF messaging. 
Alignment with the funding principles should be factored into program design and financial agreements and, 
as such, these should be reflected in delivery partner communications and engagement plans to ensure 
consistent messaging. 
Funding principle guidance

5 
Drought resilience 
The object of the Act is to enhance the public good by building drought resilience. 
Building drought resilience is a complex and long-term endeavour, as continued adaptation is required to 
meet changing circumstances over time. This is reflected in the secure and continuous funding made 
available each year for drought resilience activities, under the FDF. 
A key aspect of drought resilience is the ability to adapt, reorganise or transform in response to changing 
temperature, increasing variability and scarcity of rainfall and changed seasonality of rainfall, for improved 
economic, environmental and social resilience. The funding Plan (2024-2028) reflects this, focusing on 
building drought resilience through improved economic, environmental and social resilience. The Funding 
Plan (2024-2028) Explanatory statement provides an explanation of economic, environmental and social 
resilience. 
Climate resilience 
Drought and climate resilience activities and outcomes are often interconnected. Building resilience in one 
area can have multiple benefits of building resilience for managing other risks. While drought preparedness 
and resilience remain the key focus of the FDF, programs can consider a broader range of climatic risks where 
they meet the requirements in the Funding Plan (2024-2028). 
In line with funding principle 6(2)(b), the FDF will support and prioritise activities that achieve mutually 
reinforcing drought and climate resilience outcomes. 
Public good 
The objective of the FDF is to enhance the public good by building drought resilience. Consistent with this, 
the benefits generated from FDF funding should be accessible and/or shared by many (public benefits), 
rather than be captured solely by individual businesses or industries for private commercial gain (private 
benefits). 
Public good may be established where there are significant spill over benefits for society and the economy, 
well beyond those derived by private beneficiaries. Wherever activities could deliver both public and private 
benefits, relevant decisions should seek to leverage private or industry co-contributions (financial or in-kind) 
to offset private gains, where appropriate (see Co-contributions). Other relevant considerations include 
achieving value for money (including where the benefits achievable from the funding outweigh the costs) 
and maximising the impact of activities across Australia. 
Examples of activities that enhance the public good by building drought resilience may include those that: 
address information gaps 
drive collective behavioural change or change at scale 
maximise the value of research and development 
enhance the natural resource base 
build human capital through improved decision-making 
build social capital through strengthening networks  
share knowledge 
improve overall well-being.

6 
Co-contributions 
Co-contributions are financial or in-kind investments provided alongside program funding. They strengthen 
outcomes and ensure that initiatives deliver public benefits by offsetting private gain. 
Depending on the circumstances, these co-contributions could for example, come from a state or territory 
government, private investor, universities or another research organisation, philanthropic organisation or an 
individual. 
Leveraging co-contributions acknowledges that the benefits and role of building drought preparedness and 
resilience in agriculture are shared across many sectors of the economy and all levels of government. 
Mandatory co-investment may be less appropriate where it would create a substantial barrier to uptake, for 
example where there is a known market failure or where a small community or community organisation 
cannot contribute due to financial constraints. 
Transformational change 
Transformational change is the ability to undertake wholescale change of a system when adverse events or 
risks make the current system untenable, i.e. changes to the fundamental attributes of a social-ecological 
system. It is a way of doing things differently and innovatively when it is clear that the current system is 
untenable and losing its resilience – for example, transforming from irrigated to dry crop production when 
water becomes scarce. 
Transformational change is context dependent. While change at a large spatial scale may be 
transformational, it can also be achieved at smaller scales, including within a business. Transformational 
changes at smaller scale (farm/business) are often required to maintain resilience at larger scale (for 
example, broad landscape). The level of change that counts as ‘transformational’ is subjective and relative – 
considering the difference between a deliberate change (beyond what would typically occur) versus a 
background change. 
Transformational change is a key feature of the second phase of the FDF. However, we recognise that such 
change should not be forced on those who are not ready, and that greater consideration should be given to 
the unique circumstances and contexts of farmers and regions. 
In-drought assistance 
(Drought Plan), the FDF contributes to the government’s proactive approach to drought and the delivery of 
its drought policy. FDF programs and activities are designed to enhance drought preparedness and resilience 
across the drought cycle as outlined in the Drought Plan. 
household support payments and agricultural risk management incentives (e.g. tax concessions and 
concessional loans), improving and maintaining nationally consistent drought indicator information and for 
the FDF, including providing continued information on, and access to, drought resilience and preparedness 
activities through the FDF including: 
working with state and territory governments to co-design programs that are dependent on 
interjurisdictional implementation. 
undertaking proactive consultation with state and territory governments when designing other FDF 
programs.

7 
FDF programs, grants and arrangements are available throughout the drought cycle. The FDF programs, 
grants and arrangements do not provide in-drought hardship support. The Funding Plan (2024-2028) 
specifically excludes in-drought assistance to directly address hardship, and the duplication of existing 
sources of support. Drought preparedness and resilience remain the key focus of the FDF; however, its 
activities and their outcomes have utility across the drought cycle. 
FDF programs are designed to be flexible and responsive to on-ground conditions, particularly when drought 
conditions arise. For example, the Farm Business Resilience program has in-built flexibility to tailor activities 
to reflect the circumstances and needs of farmers during different stages of the drought cycle. Likewise, 
under the Regional Drought Resilience Planning program, regions may prioritise implementing actions in 
their plans that enable them to better manage through or recover from drought, thereby strengthening their 
drought resilience. 
Knowledge sharing and access to information 
FDF activities generate a wealth of information and knowledge that assists in building drought resilience. This 
knowledge is a valuable public resource. Sharing it supports the dissemination of drought resilience 
strategies among agricultural businesses and communities, facilitating their application. Knowledge sharing is 
a core rationale for public investment in FDF activities as it extends and amplifies public benefits. 
Transparency and public access to government information are also important. Open access to FDF 
information and the data and knowledge gained from FDF funded activities enhances the community's ability 
to engage with the department and its delivery partners about FDF programs and activities. Information 
sharing enables the community to contribute to program development, participate in program delivery, 
provide evidence for decision-making, and evaluate performance. A free flow of information between 
government, businesses, and the community can also stimulate innovation, benefiting the nation 
economically and socially. 
Acknowledgement of Country 
We acknowledge the continuous connection of First Nations Traditional Owners and Custodians to the lands, seas and waters of 
Australia. We recognise their care for and cultivation of Country. We pay respect to Elders past and present, and recognise their 
knowledge and contribution to the productivity, innovation and sustainability of Australia’s agriculture, fisheries and forestry 
industries. 
© Commonwealth of Australia 2026 
Australia (referred to as the Commonwealth). 
All material in this publication is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Licence except content supplied by 
third parties, logos and the Commonwealth Coat of Arms. 
Forestry, its employees and advisers disclaim all liability, including liability for negligence and for any loss, damage, injury, expense or 
cost incurred by any person as a result of accessing, using or relying on any of the information or data in this publication to the 
maximum extent permitted by law.