Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry 
1 
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Agriculture Senior Officials’ Committee 
Animal Welfare Task Group terms of reference 
Context 
While animal welfare regulation within Australia is generally a state and territory responsibility, there 
is a collaborative approach to managing animal welfare, with the three tiers of government each 
having animal welfare responsibilities. The Australian Government’s responsibility is limited to 
international trade—including export of livestock and meat products and partner requirements in 
negotiation of trade deals.  
State and territory governments are responsible for preparing and enforcing animal welfare 
legislation, providing suitable institutional and legislative frameworks, developing appropriate 
policies and programs, and promoting and making these readily accessible to the public.  
Local governments have responsibility for some areas of domestic animal control and public health 
that have a significant impact on animal welfare. This includes providing feedback to state and 
territory governments on animal welfare legislation and for the promotion and maintenance of 
responsible animal ownership.  
Since the 1980s, the welfare of farm animals in Australia has been supported by a series of Model 
Codes of Practice for the Welfare of Animals (MCOP), which were adopted voluntarily by animal 
industry sectors. 
A review of MCOP in 2005 recommended that the codes be converted into Australian Animal 
Welfare Standards and Guidelines, with the standards to be adopted as minimum legal standards by 
Australian states and territories, and the guidelines for recommended practice to be adopted 
voluntarily by industry.  
The introduction of animal welfare standards and guidelines aimed to improve welfare regulation in 
Australia through a greater focus on improved welfare outcomes, practical implementation for 
industry, and consistency across all Australian jurisdictions. The development of Australian Animal 
Welfare Standards and Guidelines is overseen by the Animal Welfare Task Group (AWTG), a 
committee comprised of officials from the Australian, state, territory and New Zealand (in an 
observer capacity) governments.  
The development of national animal welfare standards and guidelines through the collaborative 
mechanism of the AWTG is intended to provide clarity and consistency and facilitate the 
understanding of animal welfare requirements across industry, the community and trading partners. 
Purpose 
The AWTG promotes the national consistency of farm animal* welfare regulations across 
jurisdictions and oversees the development and review of standards and guidelines for farm animals. 
It resolves animal welfare policy and regulatory matters which have national and inter-jurisdictional 
scope and delivers on animal welfare priorities of national interest referred to it by the Agriculture

Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry 
2 
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Senior Officials’ Committee (AGSOC). The purpose of these terms of reference is to articulate the 
scope of work for the AWTG and how members should work together in pursuit of shared goals. 
* Farm animal means any animal kept in an agricultural setting for, or used in the production of, animals or 
animal by-products. AWTG retains the ability to include or exclude animal species based on the group’s 
workplan, and/or priorities set by AGSOC. 
Deliverables 
The AWTG will: 
• 
deliver on animal welfare priorities of national interest, including the provision of strategic 
advice, referred to it by the AGSOC or identified in its annual workplan. 
• 
consider emerging animal welfare concerns of national interest and respond proactively. 
• 
oversee the development and review of nationally consistent standards and guidelines for farm 
animal welfare, including the review of Model Codes of Practice for the Welfare of Animals and 
conversion to the Australian Animal Welfare Standards and Guidelines. An annual workplan will 
be developed that prioritises the deliverables for the calendar year. 
Membership 
Sponsor 
The Secretary of the Commonwealth Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry is the AGSOC 
sponsor for the committee. 
Committee Members 
Membership is tied to positions, not an individual, and each member is assigned one vote. Members 
should have the appropriate delegation within their agency to make financial decisions and have 
appropriate knowledge of animal welfare matters in their jurisdiction. Positions may include Chief 
Veterinary Officer or Director/Manager of an agencies’ animal welfare program.  
Current members are listed on the AWTG website: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-
land/animal/welfare/awtg/members 
Meetings 
Meeting frequency 
The AWTG holds 4-6 formal meetings a year, approximately every 2 months, or as needed. Meetings 
will be virtual unless a face-to-face meeting has been requested by the Chair and agreed by 
members. Members must attend meetings or nominate a proxy. Meetings will run with a minimum 
of 6 members or proxies. 
Proxies 
Proxies must have sufficient professional or technical expertise and delegated authority to speak, act 
and make decisions on behalf of those they represent.

Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry 
3 
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Support staff 
Support staff of members must be identified by members through written notification to the 
Secretariat and the Chair and must not exceed two persons per member. Support staff can act as 
proxies in the absence of their member in meetings for decision-making purposes. 
Observers 
Guests will be co-opted on a temporary basis for a specific purpose relating to the AWTG workplan or 
general work of the group, for example presenting an agenda item at a meeting, and will be by 
agreement of the Chair. The AWTG, with agreement from the Chair, may grant observer status to 
other organisations or individuals, for example a guest presenter. An observer will not have voting 
rights and will be involved for the purpose of information sharing/provision of feedback for example 
on particular papers or items. 
Agenda and papers 
The agenda for each meeting will be prepared by the Secretariat in consultation with the Chair and 
members. Agenda papers will be prepared by the member responsible for the relevant agenda item 
and provided to the Secretariat for distribution with the agenda approximately 2 weeks prior to a 
meeting. 
Governance 
While the AWTG reports to AGSOC, it develops its own workplan and determines priorities in 
consultation with stakeholders and AGSOC. Work can also be referred to the AWTG by AGSOC. 
Decision making 
Where deemed appropriate, the group may progress decisions out-of-session. AWTG will work 
towards unanimous consensus. Where this cannot be achieved matters may be escalated to AGSOC 
at the discretion of the Chair. 
Workplan 
A 12-month forward workplan will be submitted to AGSOC for approval as soon as practicable at the 
beginning of the calendar year. To ensure ongoing accountability the workplan will include clear 
timeframes for the development of Standards and Guidelines as well as any other deliverables.  
The AWTG will coordinate investment, resource allocation and decision making, in accordance with 
the annual work plan. 
Financial expenditure 
This forum will use a cost-sharing arrangement divided between jurisdictions. Generally, this will be 
based on the current formula whereby the Commonwealth and states/territories split costs on a 1:1 
ratio. The states/territories portion will then be divided between the states and territories based on 
the proportion of the specific animal industry within each of the states and territories. Funding 
arrangements will be agreed by members for each project. 
For other models, including those involving industry, cost-sharing including industry contribution if 
applicable will be agreed on a project-by-project basis.

Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry 
4 
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Reporting 
An annual report will be provided to AGSOC by the nominated due date in the appropriate template 
as directed by the AGSOC Secretariat.  
The AWTG will publish a version of the annual report on the AWTG page of the Department of 
Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry website. This will include an update on the status of deliverables 
for the past year. 
Communiques 
Following a meeting the Secretariat, in consultation with project leads, will draft a communique 
providing an update of the AWTG’s work. Following the Chair’s approval, the communique will be 
published on the AWTG page of the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry website. 
Communiques should also be issued when key decisions or outcomes have been achieved. 
Media inquiries and correspondence 
Media inquiries relating to AWTG will be handled by the lead jurisdiction in consultation with the 
Chair, the Secretariat and others as needed. General correspondence will be predominantly handled 
by the Secretariat and forwarded to the relevant member as needed. 
Working groups 
The AWTG may establish and direct working groups to work on specific projects or tasks. The 
working groups will report their progress to the AWTG. 
Review of terms of reference 
The TOR will be reviewed every 12 months or as required. This review should also encompass 
consideration of the relevancy and effectiveness of the AWTG. 
The initial TOR, as well as any subsequent updates to the TOR during the review process will require 
AGSOC approval. 
Sunset clause 
The work of the AWTG will be ongoing until directed to cease by AGSOC. 
Secretariat support 
Ongoing Secretariat support for the AWTG will be provided by the Australian Government 
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry via its Animal Welfare Branch. 
Other information 
For further guidance on operations refer to the AWTG Operating Guidelines.