We initiated the prawn imports review following an outbreak of white spot disease in 2016–17.
We have:
- assessed the biosecurity risks of importing non-viable, farm-sourced, frozen, uncooked whole prawns intended for human consumption
- developed proposed measures to manage the identified risks
- engaged the members of the scientific advisory group to review the draft and provisional final reports
- released a draft report for stakeholder comment
- commissioned new research to better understand disease agents of concern
- prepared a provisional final report
- released the final report.
Learn more about why we carry out risk analyses and our international obligations.
Steps completed
When we do a risk analysis, we:
- start the risk analysis by reviewing the science on pests and diseases of concern
- assess and analyse biosecurity risks
- develop proposed biosecurity measures
- consult stakeholders on the draft report and then review comments
- publish a final report
- develop import conditions
- publish import conditions in our Biosecurity Import Conditions System (BICON).
Pre-release information session about the final report
On 30 May 2023, the department held an online pre-release information session to discuss the final report and answer questions. If you missed it, you can download a copy of the presentation and a transcript of the event.
Download
Presentation - final report information session (PDF 278 KB)
Transcript - final report information session (PDF 352 KB)
Transcript - final report information session (DOCX 254 KB)
If you have difficulty accessing these files, visit web accessibility for assistance.
Unfortunately, we did not have time to answer all questions posed to us during the online pre-release information session. We have now prepared answers to these additional questions.
Download
Additional questions and answers (PDF 202 KB)
Additional questions and answers (DOCX 747 KB)
If you have difficulty accessing these files, visit web accessibility for assistance.
Scientific advisory group
We engaged members of the scientific advisory group (SAG) in their capacity as independent experts. The members of the SAG reviewed whether we properly considered relevant matters and made appropriate conclusions based on the available scientific information when conducting the review.
To support their review, the members of the SAG also sought technical and scientific advice from three independent experts.
The members of the SAG reviewed the draft report for the prawn review in 2021 and the provisional final report in 2022. Overall, the members of the SAG were supportive of the outcomes of the prawn review and found that we had appropriately considered their findings on the draft report, the stakeholder submissions received in response to the draft report and all the new scientific information.
About the draft report
We released a draft report in September 2020 and invited stakeholder feedback by 15 January 2021. We received submissions covering a wide range of perspectives. The department carefully considered all submissions when preparing the provisional final report.
Download draft report
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment, September 2020
Review of the biosecurity risks of prawns imported from all countries for human consumption – draft report (PDF 4.1 MB)
Review of the biosecurity risks of prawns imported from all countries for human consumption – draft report (DOCX 3.88 MB)
If you have difficulty accessing these files, visit web accessibility for assistance.
Consultation webinar
In November 2020 we held a webinar with over 120 registered participants over 2 hours to discuss the draft report. You can download the presentation and a transcript of the presentation and question and answer session.
Download
Webinar presentation (PDF 5.4 MB)
Transcript of presentation and question and answer session (PPTX 5.2 MB)
Transcript of presentation and question and answer session (PDF 460 KB)
Transcript of presentation and question and answer session (DOCX 173 KB)
If you have difficulty accessing these files, visit web accessibility for assistance.
Additional questions
Unfortunately, we did not have time to answer all questions posed to us before or during the webinar. We have now prepared answers to these additional questions.
Download
Additional questions and answers (PDF 330 KB)
Additional questions and answers (DOCX 135 KB)
If you have difficulty accessing these files, visit web accessibility for assistance.
Previous communication and consultation
We put in place a Prawn Review Liaison Officer (PRLO) and undertook several consultation and communication activities. We committed to ongoing communication and consultation with all stakeholders throughout the process of the review.
The PRLO is the first point of contact to discuss the review. The PRLO released a periodic prawn review update newsletter to subscribed stakeholders with relevant information about the review.
Availability of the hazard table for stakeholders
The hazard table was peer reviewed by two leading experts in infectious diseases of crustaceans. The hazard table was made available to interested stakeholders before the release of the draft report.
Scientific submissions on prawn import conditions
In March 2018 we invited scientific submissions on specific issues with:
- Australia's current prawn import conditions
- the Final generic import risk analysis report for prawns and prawn products 2009 (Prawn IRA).
The scientific information provided in the submissions was taken into account in the hazard identification, and considered when we conducted the risk assessments.
Roundtable discussion
In February 2018 we hosted a roundtable discussion with key stakeholders in Canberra. Affected stakeholders, from all stakeholder groups attended.
This was an opportunity to:
- discuss the risk analysis and future direction of the review
- ask questions
- hear differing views
- voice concerns.
Download summary report
Prawn roundtable meeting Feb 2018 - Summary report (PDF 984 KB)
Prawn roundtable meeting Feb 2018 - Summary report (DOCX 702 KB)
If you have difficulty accessing these files, visit web accessibility for assistance.
Generic import risk analysis for prawns and prawn products
We completed an import risk analysis of prawns and prawn products (prawn IRA) in 2009.
The 2009 prawn IRA recommended that the import of prawns and prawn products for human consumption be allowed subject to compliance with specified risk management measures.
Since 2017, conditions for importing prawns and prawn products have progressively changed. Stakeholders were advised of these changes via Biosecurity Advice 2020-A03, Biosecurity Advice 2018-15 and Biosecurity Advice 2017-12.
Download final report
Biosecurity Australia, 2009
Generic import risk analysis report for prawns and prawn products (PDF 1.2 MB)
Generic import risk analysis report for prawns and prawn products (DOCX 3.8 MB)
Final generic import risk analysis (IRA) report for prawns and prawn products- appeal findings
If you have difficulty accessing these files, visit web accessibility for assistance.
Download supporting documents
National survey of bait and berley use by recreational fishers: A follow-up survey focussing on prawns/shrimps, Kewagama report to Biosecurity Australia, January 2007 (PDF 1.0 MB)
Summary of TSV infection challenges (PDF 88 KB)
Summary of TSV infection challenges (DOCX 182 KB)
National survey of bait and berley use by recreational fishers, Kewagama report to Biosecurity Australia, January 2002 (DOCX 1.6 MB)
National survey of bait and berley use by recreational fishers, Kewagama report to Biosecurity Australia, January 2002 (DOC 713 KB)
If you have difficulty accessing these files, visit web accessibility for assistance.