In 2024, the Agriculture Senior Officials Committee and Agriculture Ministers Meeting are considering amendments 
to the Australian Animal Welfare Standards and Guidelines for Land Transport of Livestock, specifically the 
standards and guidelines applicable to horses. A Decision Regulation Impact Statement (DRIS) includes the 
proposed amendments, and a detailed rationale for the changes, including an evaluation of alternative options. 
This summary is provided as a quick overview of the targeted and public consultation processes that led to the 
Prior to releasing the CRIS, the AWTG undertook targeted consultation in February 2021 with the equine industry 
and livestock transporter stakeholders across Australia. A total of 244 stakeholders were invited to provide 
feedback on how the standards and guidelines could be improved to better reflect horse welfare. Stakeholders 
were also asked to suggest any alternative options, as well as types of data the AWTG should collect to support its 
analysis of horse land transport. The February 2021 consultation paper was based on AWTG’s review of scientific 
research and current international standards and legislation from Europe, New Zealand, Canada, the United 
States, and the World Animal Health Organisation, as well as findings and recommendations of the Inquiry into 
Animal Cruelty in the Management of Retired Thoroughbred and Standardbred Horses (the Martin Inquiry), and 
Feedback on the consultation paper was received from 85 stakeholder groups and individuals across Australia (see 
List 1). The proposals in the CRIS were informed by that feedback and evolved significantly based on valuable 
insights on industry best practice, and on the practical application of research to real-life scenarios. 
The AWTG also sought specific feedback on the impacts of the proposals for feral horse and donkey management 
programs via the national Environment and Invasives Committee. Technical input from the Australian Veterinary 
The CRIS was open for comment from 16 September to 28 October 2022. A total of 63 submissions were received 
from a range of stakeholders in response to the proposals in the CRIS (see List 2). 
The purpose of the CRIS was to seek feedback, data and input on the options proposed to achieve improvement in 
the welfare of horses during land transport from the following stakeholders: the equine industry; equestrian groups; 
the livestock transport industry; transport regulators; animal welfare groups; equine veterinarians; and other 
interested stakeholders across Australia. The consultation outcomes have provided valuable assistance in the 
Following the consultation period DAF met with several stakeholders to discuss feedback, including with Australian 
racing authorities, some commercial transporters and equine and veterinary experts. The AWTG has analysed all 
stakeholder feedback on the CRIS and has used it to develop final policy proposals presented in the Decision RIS. 
All stakeholder feedback received during the consultation period for the CRIS has been considered in making final