Customs brokers are not directly regulated under Australia’s illegal logging laws. Legal obligations are placed on the businesses that regulated import wood, pulp and paper products into Australia.
However, your clients may ask for help understanding their responsibilities under the illegal logging laws.
What your clients need to do
Australia’s illegal logging laws make it a criminal offence to import illegally logged timber.
Importers are required by law to assess and mitigate the risk that the products they are importers may include illegally logged timber. These ‘due diligence’ requirements must be met prior to importation.
How you can help
You can refer your clients to information for importers to learn what they need to do.
A fact sheet is also available to help you educate clients on their responsibilities.
Notice and information requirements (NIR)
From 3 March 2025, the reformed Illegal Logging Prohibition Act 2012 introduces a requirement for importers to provide notice to the department when importing regulated timber products. However, this requirement is not yet being implemented.
We anticipate that key due diligence information such as species and location of harvest will be required as part of the notice, in the form of an e-declaration. We intend to implement a new IT system to facilitate importers providing these notices. However, this system is still being developed.
Importers will not be required to provide these notices until the IT system is ready. We will provide ample notice and guidance before you are expected to provide e-declarations.
In the meantime, importers are still required to meet their due diligence requirements and keep the prescribed records.
Guidance material to assist you in meeting NIR requirements will be available on the resources for importers page in due course.
 
Reporting illegal timber
We are always interested to hear about potential illegal timber sources. If you have information about trade in potentially illegally logged timber, you can call us on 1800 803 006 for a confidential discussion or provide this information anonymously via this online form: Report Illegal Logging.
Resources
You can refer your clients to resources for importers for useful guidance and tools to help with their due diligence requirements.
Get updates
To receive updates, guidance, and information about upcoming events, please subscribe to our illegal logging mailing list.