We are responsible for ensuring compliance with Australia’s illegal logging laws.
We also provide assistance to importers and processors seeking to better understand the laws and their responsibilities.
Significant penalties can apply if you:
- import or process timber products that have come from illegally logged sources
- breach your due diligence requirements, including failing to respond to a Request for Information (RFI) notice.
Compliance Assessments
We regularly assess compliance with the due diligence requirements under the Illegal Logging Prohibition Act 2012 (Act) and Illegal Logging Prohibition Rules 2024 (Rules) of the legislation.
If you are selected for an assessment, we will send you a Requirement to Give Information and Produce Documents notice. You need to provide the requested information by the date on the Requirement to Give Information and Produce Documents notice. This will require you to provide information about your due diligence system and how it was applied to the importation of a specific regulated timber product, or the processing of logs. You are required to provide the requested information by the date stated on the notice.
The notice will ask you for:
- A copy of your written due diligence system.
- Records that demonstrate how you applied your due diligence system to particular timber products or load of raw logs (as selected by us).
We will then assess how your due diligence practices meet the requirements of the illegal logging laws. A compliance report will be provided detailing the findings, identifying any actions required by you and the timeframe for you to respond.
Where required, we will take action to address non-compliance and enforce laws.
The Act and Rules include the following regulatory tools and response measures to encourage compliance with the illegal logging laws:
- written letters of warning
- infringement notices
- civil penalty provisions
- enforceable undertakings
- injunctions
- monitoring and investigation powers for inspectors appointed under the Illegal Logging Prohibition Act 2012.
- criminal sanctions.
Infringement notices are issued under Part 5 of the Regulatory Powers (Standard Provisions) Act 2014. The current value of a penalty unit is $330, effective from 7 November 2024. Penalty unit values are subject to indexation and are prescribed by the Crimes Act 1914.
The whole-of-department Compliance Policy sets out the principles we follow when carrying out our compliance activities and outlines our strategies and tools for managing compliance.
Our compliance activities are guided by our regulatory practice principles as set out in our Regulatory Practice Statement.
Resources
Information for importers and processors on how to understand and comply with the legislation including guidance on undertaking effective and robust due diligence is available on our website.
An optional response template is provided below to assist importers and processors who have been issued a Requirement to Give Information and Produce Documents Notice in compiling and explaining their due diligence documents.
Australia’s illegal logging law reforms
As of 3 March 2025, Australia’s illegal logging laws have changed.
The Illegal Logging Prohibition Act 2012 has been updated to ensure it remains fit-for-purpose and aligns with international best practice. The new Illegal Logging Prohibition Rules 2024 replace the previous Illegal Logging Regulation 2012 and outlines the updated due diligence requirements.
The documents below may reference the old legislation, however the content within them still applies. Thank you for your patience as we work to update these references.
Download a template to help respond to a Requirement to Give Information and Produce Documents Notice
Importers: Responding to a Requirement to Give Information and Produce Documents notice (PDF 219 KB)
Importers: Responding to a Requirement to Give Information and Produce Documents notice (DOCX 236 KB)
Processors: Responding to a Requirement to Give Information and Produce Documents notice (PDF 220 KB) 
Processors: Responding to a Requirement to Give Information and Produce Documents notice (DOCX 236 KB)
If you have difficulty accessing these files, visit web accessibility for assistance.
Questions and answers
If you are importing products from pathways that the department considers pose a high risk of containing illegally logged material, you may be sent a notice.
If you have previously been assessed or audited by the department and received a compliance report identifying non-compliant processes, you may be subject to future compliance assessments or audits. This is particularly the case if the products you are importing fall into a high-risk category.
We have developed an understanding of the pathways and products that pose the greatest risk of containing illegally logged material. Our compliance efforts focus on these areas. We determine highest risk through analysis of trends in regulated imports, combined with intelligence and information shared or available through our domestic and international engagement and intelligence networks.
- Products from fragile and conflict affected areas Fragile and conflict-affected parts of the world are characterised by limited institutional capacity, ineffective laws and governance arrangements and political instability. While it is possible to buy legal wood from these areas, responsible buyers must negotiate unclear political mandates, contested laws, weak governance and lack of enforcement relating to forest protection. Official documents may also be vulnerable to fraud or forgery. Australian companies considering importing timber from these areas need to invest significant resources to ensure that their due diligence practices are strong. They must also ensure the resultant risk assessments and risk mitigation practices are robust. Many reports and tools are available online to help determine which areas fall into this high-risk category. Sawn wood is the most common product imported from these types of regions. However, other common product categories include veneers, moulding and strips, joinery products and plywood. In this category, we will consider risks reported by non-government organisations. This includes suspensions or terminations of the operation of timber legality framework approvals within conflict affected areas. Imports from conflict affected areas may be targeted for compliance assessment or audit.
- CITES listed species and other species of concern We are strongly committed to supporting the efforts of other nations to protect their threatened timber species. This includes the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES), as well as country-specific threatened species protection legislation. We work closely with the Australian Government Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water to better track and monitor the trade in CITES listed species. We also work with enforcement agencies in other countries. We will continue targeting species from key areas of concern. We particularly look for where illicit substitution may occur and/or where products made from threatened or illegally harvested species may be imported. Our analytical software alerts us to the importation of many goods likely to contain species of concern. We continually update the data filtering and querying capabilities within this software to remain agile and responsive to any timber products of concern.
- Complex supply chains – sourcing through multiple countries We understand that long and complex supply chains make it more difficult to complete comprehensive assessments of the origin and/or species of the timber used in regulated products. However, complex supply chains may also increase the risk of a product containing illegally harvested timber. This is because each additional step in the supply chain represents another potential point where illegal timber could be used in the product. The more complex your supply chain, the more information you need to gather to determine the risk of the product containing illegal timber. In this category, we will be looking particularly at imports from countries that have international reputations as ‘tax havens’. This includes locations alleged through our intelligence gathering to be notable supply routes for laundering illegal timber.
- Environmental non-government organisation reports and studies There are a number of environmental non-government organisations who have spent time amassing considerable information and skill in monitoring and tracking illegal logging. These groups have people on the ground in high-risk countries. In some cases, they have built up substantial evidence regarding high risk pathways and supply chains. We will continue to work with these groups as a source of information to support our compliance operations. We closely monitor information presented through their reports and review allegations made.
For more information
If you have questions about your legal responsibilities and the due diligence requirements, please call the Illegal Logging Hotline 1800 657 313.
Public reports of suspected illegal logging or related intelligence can be an important source of information. When undertaking your own due diligence assessments we request that you watch and report any concerning activities to the department. These might include, for example: forged documents, goods being sold significantly below the market rate, appropriate taxes not being included in the price, being asked to pay a bribe or being offered a lower price for goods without paperwork.
We take allegations of non-compliance seriously. If you know something or have concerns about illegally logged products we provide further contact details below on how to report your concerns to us.
If you have questions about your legal responsibilities and the due diligence requirements, please call the Illegal Logging Hotline 1800 657 313.
Alternatively, if you believe your supplier is dealing in illegally logged timber, you can call our Redline on 1800 803 006 for a confidential discussion. You can also report suspected dealings in or undertakings of illegal logging activity via our online reporting form. We respect the confidentiality of those supplying information. You can remain anonymous and the information will be treated in accordance with Australian Government privacy laws.
See Report Illegal Logging
Email Operational Intelligence and Coordination Branch.
Get updates
To receive updates, guidance, and information about upcoming events, subscribe to our illegal logging mailing list.