Australia’s illegal logging law reforms
As of 3 March 2025, Australia’s illegal logging laws have changed. Importantly, this includes changes to due diligence requirements for importers and processors of regulated timber and timber products.
The Illegal Logging Prohibition Act 2012 has been updated to ensure it remains fit-for-purpose and aligns with international best practice. The new Illegal Logging Prohibition Rules 2024 replace the previous Illegal Logging Prohibition Regulation 2012 and outline the updated due diligence requirements.
We have updated our guidance material accordingly and strongly encourage our regulated community to ensure you are familiar with all changes and what it means for you.
Visit our legislation review and consultation page for information on the extensive review process that informed changes to these laws.
Before you import timber and wood-based products into Australia, you need to understand your responsibilities as an importer.
Illegally logged timber
It is a criminal offence to import illegally logged timber into Australia.
If you do import a product which is made from or contains illegally logged timber, you could face significant financial penalties and even prison time.
Regulated timber products
If you intend to import any timber or timber product/s, you will need to determine whether it is a regulated timber product and if any exemptions apply.
If you determine that the timber or timber product/s that you intend to import are regulated, you are required by law to assess and mitigate the risk that your product may include illegally logged timber before importing. This process is called ‘due diligence’.
If you fail to complete your due diligence before importation, you could face significant financial penalties.
Find out how to do due diligence.
Notice and Information Requirement (NIR)
As you may be aware, prior to March 2025, Australia’s illegal logging laws included a requirement to answer an illegal logging Community Protection Question (CPQ) when importing regulated timber products. This is no longer the case.
The reformed Illegal Logging Prohibition Act 2012 includes a new requirement for importers to provide notice to the department when importing regulated timber products. However, this requirement is not yet in effect.
We anticipate that key due diligence information such as species and location of harvest will be required as part of the notice, in the form of an e-declaration. We intend to implement a new IT system to facilitate importers providing these notices. However, this system is still being developed.
Importers will not be required to provide these notices until the IT system is ready. We intend to work closely with our regulated community once the system is operational, before the requirement comes into effect.
Until then, in the absence of the CPQ and notice requirement, importers are still expected to meet their due diligence requirements and keep a record.
Guidance material to assist you in meeting NIR requirements will be available on this page once requirements come into effect.
Reporting illegal timber
We are always interested to hear about potential illegal timber sources. If you have information about trade in potentially illegally logged timber, you can call us on 1800 803 006 for a confidential discussion, or provide this information anonymously via this online form: Report Illegal Logging.
Resources
Find out more about illegal logging and why Australia has illegal logging laws.
We have provided a range of resources to help with due diligence, including a high-level factsheet that outlines your key responsibilities under the laws. We have also created a list of Frequently Asked Questions.
Get updates
To receive updates, guidance, and information about upcoming events, subscribe to our illegal logging mailing list.
Illegal logging reporting
Call 1800 803 006
See Report Illegal Logging
Email Operational Intelligence and Coordination Branch