Australia’s illegal logging law reforms
As of 3 March 2025, Australia’s illegal logging laws have changed. Importantly, this includes changes to due diligence requirements for importers and processors of regulated timber and timber products.
The Illegal Logging Prohibition Act 2012 has been updated to ensure it remains fit-for-purpose and aligns with international best practice. The new Illegal Logging Prohibition Rules 2024 replace the previous Illegal Logging Prohibition Regulation 2012 and outline the updated due diligence requirements.
We have updated our guidance material accordingly and strongly encourage our regulated community to ensure you are familiar with all changes and what it means for you.
Visit our legislation review and consultation page for information on the extensive review process that informed changes to these laws.
Before you process an Australian grown raw log, you need to understand your legal responsibilities as a processor.
Illegally logged timber
It is a criminal offence to process an Australian grown log that has been illegally logged.
If you process a raw log which has been illegally logged, you could face significant financial penalties and even prison time.
Due diligence
Before you process an Australian grown raw log, you need to assess and mitigate the risk that it has been illegally logged. This process is called ‘due diligence’. If you fail to complete your due diligence before processing the log, you could face significant financial penalties.
Find out how to do due diligence.
Notice and Information Requirement (NIR)
The reformed Illegal Logging Prohibition Act 2012 includes a new requirement for processors to provide notice to the department when processing regulated timber products. However, this requirement is not yet in effect.
We anticipate that key due diligence information such as species and location of harvest will be required as part of the notice, in the form of an e-declaration. We intend to implement a new IT system to facilitate importers providing these notices. However, this system is still being developed.
Processors will not be required to provide these notices until the IT system is ready. We intend to work closely with our regulated community once the system is operational, before the requirement comes into effect.
Until then, processors are still expected to meet their due diligence requirements and keep a record.
Guidance material to assist you in meeting NIR requirements will be available on this page once requirements come into effect.
Processing raw logs
Under the illegal logging laws, ‘processing’ refers to activities that involve turning a raw log into anything other than a raw log. This includes turning raw logs into:
- woodchips
- sawn timber
- pulp
- other timber products
Preparation activities at the harvest site are not considered processing. These include felling, bucking (cutting a felled tree into logs of useable lengths), delimbing, and preparing raw logs for transport.
Exemption
Australia’s illegal logging laws offer an exemption where the processor is also the person who harvested the raw log. In this case, you are not required to conduct due diligence on your raw logs.
However, if you are audited or issued a Request for Information notice, you must be able to prove that the exemption applies to your raw logs.
Resources
Find out more about illegal logging and why Australia has the illegal logging laws.
We have provided a range of resources to help with due diligence, including a high-level factsheet that outlines your key responsibilities under the laws. We have also created a list of Frequently Asked Questions.
Reporting illegal timber
We are always interested to hear about potential illegal timber sources. If you have information about trade in potentially illegally logged timber, you can call us on 1800803006 for a confidential discussion provide this information anonymously via this online form: Report Illegal Logging.
Get updates
To receive updates, guidance, and information about upcoming events, subscribe to our illegal logging mailing list.
Illegal logging reporting
Call 1800 803 006
See Report Illegal Logging
Email Operational Intelligence and Coordination Branch