Australia’s agricultural sector requires a resilient, growing, and diverse workforce to fill a range of roles from  

diverse workforce to attract potential employees into the sector and train and retain them once they are 

there. While supports are wide ranging and cover many groups, this fact sheet covers three specific groups: 

people with disability, women, and First Nations people. 

The Department of Social Services (DSS) provides a range of support services to employees and employers. DSS also funds 

organisations to provide advocacy services to people with disability under the National Disability Advocacy Program.

Support for people with disability 

Employment Assistance Fund (EAF) 

The EAF provides financial assistance to eligible people  

with disability and employers. Financial assistance can be 

provided for work related modifications, Auslan services, 

specialist services, and disability awareness training.  

More information can be found at  

jobaccess.gov.au/employment-assistance-fund-eaf

Post Placement Support and Ongoing Support

Disability Employment Service (DES) providers can provide 

support to the participant and their employer (with the 

participant’s consent) for the first year in employment.  

Employers can talk to DES providers about any workplace 

modifications that may be required, help with job design, on-

the-job training and other supports that may be needed for 

the DES participant. DES providers can offer ongoing supports 

to participants and employers after 26 weeks in a job, where 

required.  This ongoing support can continue beyond the first 

52 weeks of the placement, for as long as needed.

JobAccess Support

The JobAccess advice service is delivered by a team of allied 

health professionals who provide free, confidential, expert 

advice on disability employment matters. The JobAccess 

website also provides information for people with disability, 

employers, and service providers on all aspects of disability 

employment.  More information can be found at  

jobaccess.gov.au/employers/available-support

National Disability Recruitment Coordinator (NDRC)

The NDRC is focused on supporting employers to increase 

their disability confidence and develop the skills to employ 

more people with disability. NDRC also undertakes employer 

engagement activities to help improve employer’s knowledge 

and awareness of disability employment and available 

government services. More information can be found at  

jobaccess.gov.au/service-providers/national-disability-

recruitment-coordinator 

Workforce diversity and inclusion in agriculture

First Nation Australians participate in mainstream employment support services, such as the Community Development 

Program (CDP) and those provided by Workforce Australia. The government is also providing specific employment 

programs for First Nation Australians, such as the Indigenous Skills and Employment Program (ISEP). 

Find out more information on:

CDP: niaa.gov.au/indigenous-affairs/employment/cdp,  

Workforce Australia assistance: workforceaustralia.gov.au/individuals/coaching/assistance 

ISEP:niaa.gov.au/indigenous-affairs/employment/indigenous-skills-and-employment-program-isep.

Closing the Gap

The 2023 Commonwealth Closing the Gap Implementation Plan outlines the government’s forward looking  

strategic priorities for Closing the Gap. The Closing the Gap Implementation plan is available at  

niaa.gov.au/resource-centre/indigenous-affairs/commonwealth-closing-gap-implementation-plan-2023. 

New Jobs Program Trial (NJPT)

The NJPT will provide community-based organisations in targeted CDP regions the opportunity to  

develop local approaches to jobs that support jobseekers to move off the income support system and  

into employment. The trial is another step towards delivering the Government’s commitment to  

replace the CDP with a new program. More information can be found at  

niaa.gov.au/indigenous-affairs/employment/remote-jobs. 

The Office for Women (OFW) works to advance the Government’s commitment to achieve gender equality and improve the 

lives of people in Australia. 

Support for women

Support for First Nations Australians 

Learn more at:  

jobaccess.gov.au/people-with-disability/available-support/1631          

pmc.gov.au/office-women         

ctgreport.niaa.gov.au

AGR077.0623

National Women’s Alliances  

(the Alliances) 

The Alliances are funded through the WLDP to collaborate  

that impact women. Six civil society Alliances are funded to 

ensure that women’s voices are heard in the policymaking 

process. More information can be found at  

pmc.gov.au/office-women/grants-and-funding/national-

womens-alliances

Women’s Leadership and Development Program 

(WLDP) Project Grants

The WLDP Project Grants stream support a range of projects 

that achieve tangible improvements in outcomes for Australian 

women across six key priority areas – women’s job creation, 

economic security, workforce participation, leadership, safety, 

and international engagement. Grant opportunities seek to 

fund projects that contribute to the achievement of all, one, or 

a combination of the six key priority areas listed above.  

More information can be found at 

pmc.gov.au/office-women/grants-and-funding