Whether it is a natural disaster or a neighbourhood 

emergency, our food supply could be disrupted. 

In any situation, it is up to each of us to take care 

of our needs and those of our families. 

We buy insurance for our home, our car and our lives, 

but something as essential as adequate supplies of food, 

water and critical items are often overlooked. Please 

consider building an essential pantry and emergency kit 

for your household. 

Getting ready for an emergency 

Emergencies can happen anywhere and anyt ime, and can have a 

significant impact on people's lives. 

Being prepared for an emergency can ensure that you and your 

family can manage if affected by an emergency such as: 

• Bushfire  

• Flood 

• Influenza Pandemic 

Naturally all households differ, and you should customise the list to 

suit the needs of your household. 

You should also give special consideration to any family members with 

special needs, such as babies, young children, pregnant women, the 

elderly, ill or infirmed. 

You can start to build your supplies over time, adding more each time 

you shop. Regularly check the expiry date/s of your emergency 

supplies, and consume or replace any items as required. 

Be prepared 

In addition to ensuring you have an adequate supply of food, 

water and emergency provisions, there are some other simple 

steps you can take to prepare for an emergency situation: 

• Discuss your plans with family and friends. 

• Consider how family members/friends outside your household 

might cope in an emergency? Would any other family members join 

your household in an emergency situation (eg parents, 

grandparents, adult children)? If so, you may need to consider 

how to include them in your plans. 

• Have important phone numbers such as your family doctor, 

local police station, State Emergency Service, fire brigade 

• Cyclone 

• Utility failure 

• Storms 

• Earthquake 

and utility providers in a prominent place (eg the fridge door). 

• Listen to local news and get up to date information. 

Emergency incidents like those listed above can affect the supply 

of essential utilities, including electricity, gas and water, and 

disrupt the supply of food, groceries and critical items. 

This brochure provides you with important information on how to 

stock your pantry to ensure your household has an adequate 

supply of food, water and emergency items to cope with a 

prolonged emergency situation. It also contains a 'pantry list' 

of suggested supplies. 

Stocking your pantry 

Most households purchase groceries on a weekly basis, and may also 

do additional top up shops during the week. But think of what would 

happen if an emergency incident occurred that prevented access to 

the shops, for example where injury, illness or road closures may keep 

you confined at home. Most households would very quickly run out of 

food, especially if electricity and water supplies were affected. 

While many emergencies will only extend over a few days, planning 

for a 14- day stay at home (possibly without water and electricity) 

by building and rotating items in your pantry, ensures you are 

prepared for a wide range of circumstances. 

The Pantry list is grouped into the types of food and other essential 

items that may be required during an extended stay at home. 

These include: 

Hygiene 

Maintain a high level of hygiene. The last thing you would want if 

you were confined at home, is for yourself or a family member to 

become ill. 

• Washing and drying your hands properly is one of the best ways of 

protecting against the spread of germs. Wash your hands for at least 

20 seconds with either soap or an alcohol-based rub. Drying well is 

just as important. 

• Use alcohol based wipes to wash your hands and clean surfaces if 

water is not available. 

• The important times for washing and drying hands are before 

preparing food and eating, and after coughing, sneezing, 

blowing noses, wiping children's noses, visiting the toilet 

or looking after sick people. 

• Keep your coughs and sneezes covered. Use tissues and 

put them straight into a covered, lined rubbish bin. 

• Distance yourself from sick people to reduce the 

spread of illnesses. 

More information 

• Drinks 

• Dried and long life food 

• Emergency backup power supply 

• Ready to eat canned/bottled food 

• Pet food 

 • Snack food 

 • Baby supplies 

• Health supplies 

If you would like information on other actions you can take to prepare 

for an emergency, you may find the following websites helpful: 

www.em.gov.au  - Emergency Management Australia 

(a division of the Attorney-General's Department) 

• Other items (such as prescription medications) 

www.redcross.org.au - Australian Red Cross

For more information go to: afgc.org.au/pantrylist.html 

This brochure has been prepared by the Australian food and grocery sector in the interests of the Australian community.

• This list should only be used as 

a guide for items that may assist 

in an emergency situation and 

should be customised to meet 

your individual household needs. 

• It is suggested that households 

should hold sufficient supply of 

food, water and essential items 

to enable a household to be 

confined at home for up to 

14 days. 

• Food supplies should be 

continually used and replenished. 

• Ensure food is rotated, and use-by 

dates are checked regularly. 

Managing at home 

If you do find yourself and your 

family in a situation where you are 

confined, or choose to be confined 

at home during or following an 

emergency, there are several things 

you should consider to ensure you 

manage your supply of food in the 

best possible way. 

These include: 

• If the power is out, use refrigerated/ 

frozen food products first. 

– Refrigerated foods will remain 

safe for up to 4 hours after a 

power failure. 

– Frozen foods will remain safe for 

up to 1 day after a power failure. 

– Keeping the refrigerator/freezer 

door closed as much as possible 

may keep food safer for longer, 

however a thermometer should be 

used to ensure food has not 

exceeded 6°C. 

– Freshly cooked products stored at 

room temperature (ie not in the 

fridge) will remain safe for up to 

4 hours after cooking. 

• Consume other perishable products 

(eg fresh fruit and vegetables, 

bread) before consuming long life 

products. 

• When purchasing products for your 

pantry, aim for ready-to-eat 

products that do not require 

cooking (in case gas or electricity 

supply is disrupted). 

• Ration food/water supplies based 

on how long you expect to be 

confined at home. 

Recommended option 

Household daily consumption  

Total quantity for 14 days 

Ready to eat canned/bottled food 

Meat 

Fish 

Fruit 

Juice 

Vegetables 

Soup 

Pasta sauce 

Dried and long life food 

Ready-to-eat meals 

Breakfast cereal 

Flour/bread 

Milk powder/UHT milk 

Soup mix 

Dried vegetables 

Rice and pasta 

Long life cheeses 

Tea/coffee/drinking chocolate 

Sugar 

Snack food 

Dried fruits 

Nuts 

Biscuits 

Spreads 

Crackers 

Snack bars 

Drinks 

Bottled water (3 Litres person per day) 

Water sterilising tablets 

Concentrated juices/sports drinks 

Baby supplies 

Baby food/baby formula 

Nappies and wipes 

Pet food 

Pet food (canned/dry) 

Toiletries/cleaning products 

Toilet rolls 

Soap and shampoo 

Feminine hygiene products 

Rubbish bags 

Tissues and paper towels  

House and laundry cleaning/disinfectant 

Emergency power supply backup 

Batteries  

Portable Radio  

Manual Can Opener 

Torch, candles and matches 

Health supplies 

First aid kit 

Adult and children analgesics/pain killers 

Face masks 

Protective gloves 

Thermometer 

Alcohol based handwash/gels/wipes 

Other items 

Prescribed medications 

Other preferred household supplies