If you intend to bring cats and dogs into Norfolk Island from mainland Australia, you will need to comply with:
- Animal Importation – Norfolk Island Regional Council (nirc.gov.au)
- conditions set by the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry to manage biosecurity risks.
Make sure you have met these conditions before you bring your cat or dog to Norfolk Island.
Testing, treatment and vaccination requirements
A registered veterinarian must perform all tests, treatments and preparations required in the health certificate, including parasite treatments. The registered veterinarian must scan your cat or dog’s microchip at each veterinary visit and ensure that the scanned microchip is correctly recorded on all documentation. Parasite treatment must be effective against internal (e.g. nematodes and cestodes) and external parasites, and must kill ticks and fleas on contact (not rely on them biting the cat/dog). The chosen product must protect the dog or cat against external parasites for the entire period from treatment until the time of export, therefore short-acting treatments may not be appropriate.
Check our table of acceptable parasite treatments for cats and dogs. The list is not exhaustive. If you want to use an unlisted product, contact us first to check that it will be appropriate.
All testing must be undertaken in a National Association of Testing Authorities (NATA) laboratory within Australia. The registered veterinarian must scan the animal’s microchip at the time of sample collection and accurately record this on the test specimen and sample submission form.
Cats
Vaccinations – timeframe: vaccination course completed at least 14 days before the date of export
Your cat must be fully vaccinated, according to the manufacturer’s directions, against feline enteritis. The vaccination must be current in accordance with the registered manufacturer’s directions at the time of export. Note: animals less than 12 weeks of age cannot be considered to be fully vaccinated.
External parasite treatment – timeframe: within 5 days before export
A registered veterinarian must treat the cat with a product that kills fleas and ticks on contact within 5 days before the date of export.
See the department’s webpage for further information on acceptable treatments.
Internal parasite treatment – timeframe: within 5 days before export
A registered veterinarian must treat the cat for nematodes (roundworms) and cestodes (tapeworms) within 5 days before the date of export.
See the department’s webpage for further information on acceptable treatments.
Veterinary health examination – timeframe: within 5 days before export
Your cat must be examined by a registered veterinarian and found to be free from external parasites and clinical signs of infectious or contagious disease within 5 days before the date of export.
Completion of health certificate – timeframe: within 5 days before export
During the pre-export veterinary examination, the registered veterinarian must ensure all preparations have been correctly performed, then complete and sign the health certificate.
Notice of arrival- timeframe: within 3 days before arrival in Norfolk Island
You must notify us by email at least 3 days before your cat’s arrival in Norfolk Island.
Email a copy of the completed veterinary health certificate at least 24 hrs before the date of arrival on Norfolk Island.
Dogs
Vaccinations – timeframe: vaccination course completed at least 14 days before the date of export
Dogs must be fully vaccinated, according to the manufacturer’s directions, against canine parvovirus, canine distemper and canine hepatitis. The vaccination must be current in accordance with the registered manufacturer’s directions at the time of export. Note: animals less than 12 weeks of age cannot be considered to be fully vaccinated.
External parasite treatment – timeframe: at least 21 days before the date of blood sampling for Ehrlichia canis
A registered veterinarian must treat the dog with a product that kills ticks and fleas on contact at least 21 days before blood collection for Ehrlichia canis antibody testing. Continuous protection from external parasites must be maintained until the time of export to Norfolk Island and treatments may need to be repeated by the veterinarian in accordance with the manufacturer’s directions.
Note: To calculate 21 days after initial external parasite treatment, count the day the treatment is applied as day 0. For example, if treatment is given 1 January then the blood sample cannot be collected until 22 January.
At each subsequent veterinary visit, the Government approved veterinarian should thoroughly check the dog for external parasites. If fleas or ticks are found they must be removed, the treatment restarted and the dog tested for Ehrlichia canis antibodies 21 days later.
See the department’s webpage for further information on acceptable treatments.
Testing for Ehrlichia canis – timeframe: within 45 days before the date of export
A registered veterinarian must scan and verify the animal’s microchip and collect a blood sample at least 21 days after external parasite treatment starts and within 45 days before export to Norfolk Island. The sample must be tested for Ehrlichia canis infection by an Indirect Fluorescent Antibody Test (IFAT) for the detection of IgG antibodies and analysed at a NATA accredited laboratory within Australia. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests or an IFAT for the detection of IgM antibodies are not accepted. The test must produce a negative result at a dilution of 1:40.
If external parasite treatments do not provide continuous protection from at least 21 days before the date of blood sampling for the Ehrlichia canis testing until export, the test result will be invalidated and the external parasite treatment and testing will need to be restarted.
Heartworm testing - timeframe: within 30 days before the date of export
If your dog is over 6 months of age at the time of export, the dog must be tested negative for canine heartworm (Dirofilaria immitis) antigen on a blood sample collected within 30 days before the date of export and analysed at a NATA accredited laboratory within Australia.
Leptospira icterohaemorrhagiae testing – timeframe: within 14 days before the date of export
Your dog must be tested for Leptospira icterohaemorrhagiae using the microscopic agglutination test (MAT) on a blood sample collected within 14 days prior to the date of export and analysed at a NATA accredited laboratory within Australia. The test must produce a negative result at a serum dilution of 1:100.
Heartworm treatment – timeframe: within 30 days of the date of export to Norfolk Island
If your dog is over 6 months of age at the time of export, a registered veterinarian must treat your dog for heartworm within 5 days before the date of export with one of the following treatments:
-  
  - Milbemycin at 0.5/kg
  - Moxidectin at 2-4mcg/kg
  - Sustained release formulation moxidectin (Proheart SR-12) at approved dose rate.
Internal parasite treatment – timeframe: within 5 days before export
A registered veterinarian must treat the dog for nematodes (roundworms) and cestodes (tapeworms) within 5 days before the date of export.
See the department’s webpage for further information on acceptable treatments.
Veterinary health examination – timeframe: within 5 days before export
Your dog must be examined by a registered veterinarian and found to be free from external parasites and clinical signs of infectious or contagious disease within 5 days before the date of export.
Completion of health certificate – timeframe: within 5 days before export
During the pre-export veterinary examination, the registered veterinarian must ensure all preparations have been correctly performed, then complete and sign the health certificate.
Notice of arrival- timeframe: within 3 days before arrival in Norfolk Island
You must notify us by email at least 3 days before your dog’s arrival in Norfolk Island.
Email a copy of the completed veterinary health certificate at least 24 hrs before the date of arrival on Norfolk Island.