Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
1 
Improving market transparency in perishable agricultural goods 
industries 
Seafood industry first workshop 10 August 2021: 
Workshop communique 
Background 
In late 2020, the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) conducted an inquiry into 
bargaining power imbalances in supply chains for perishable agricultural goods (PAG) in Australia. 
The inquiry recommended that the government explore measures to increase price transparency in 
PAG industries to increase competition in those industries. 
In response to this recommendation, the Australian Government, through the Department of 
Agriculture, Water and the Environment (DAWE) has committed $5.4 million to improve price and 
market transparency in PAG industries by: 
• 
delivering co-design workshops with PAG industries to understand their market transparency 
issues, opportunities and requirements 
• 
delivering a grants program to develop and implement tailored mechanisms to improve price and 
market transparency. 
The workshops provide an opportunity for participants to discuss price and market transparency 
issues in their sector, brainstorm ideas to improve transparency and co-design the details of solutions 
going forward. 
Workshop outcomes 
Twenty-four industry and government representatives attended the first seafood price and market 
transparency workshop. The objective of the first workshop was to discover and analyse the issues, 
barriers and opportunities to achieve market and price transparency in the seafood industry. 
Participants (Appendix A) worked in small groups that explored: 
• 
Issues – Negative characteristics within the seafood industry that decrease price and market 
transparency. 
• 
Barriers – Negative characteristics external to the seafood industry that decrease price and 
market transparency. 
• 
Internal opportunities – Positive characteristics that exist within the seafood industry that can 
potentially increase price and market transparency. 
• 
External opportunities – Positive characteristics outside the seafood industry that can potentially 
increase price and market transparency.

Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
2 
Throughout this process, issues and barriers (and consequently, opportunities) were categorised as 
either legislative, regulatory, industry specific, general process, technology driven, consumer driven 
and other (for example, environmental). Table 1 identifies and categorises the key themes of issues, 
barriers and opportunities from the workshop discussions. 
Table 1 Issues, barriers and opportunities 
Category 
Issue/Barrier 
Opportunity 
Consumer 
Lack of consumer awareness of the 
benefits and positive characteristics of 
Australian seafood; pricing for consumers 
based on their perception of value; truth in 
labelling/origin. 
Increased consumer education to improve 
transparency of country/region of origin; 
increased consumer awareness of positive 
characteristics, such as environmental 
sustainability and nutritional benefits. 
Industry specific 
Industry credentials not promoted; 
wholesaler dominance; lack of trust 
between members of the supply chain; 
certification requirements, policy and 
regulation differ across state governments 
and retailers; supply models differ across 
retailers; lack communication with 
retailers. 
Increasing the scope and application of the 
SIA pledge, HARPS (Harmonised Australian 
Retailer Produce Scheme) could be 
considered for the seafood industry. 
Technology driven 
Producers are price takers and have no say 
in value of their product; labelling and 
branding of seafood can be difficult; no 
visibility of domestic production costs 
versus imported production costs. 
Digital tools: industry e-commerce; social 
media; traceability; digitisation of supply 
chains, including blockchain  
General process 
Lack of price sharing; no trade information 
on supply and price; lack of standards 
(size, quality); lack of farm management 
tools; lack of market understanding 
(composition); data not available in a 
timely way. 
Improved collection, storage and 
dissemination of timely market 
information: more informed price and 
market data to inform better decision 
making; targeted marketing. 
Next steps 
The outcomes of the first workshop provide the basis for generating ideas for potential solutions to 
improve price and market transparency in the seafood industry. Ideas generation will be co-designed 
by participants in Workshop 2 on 7 September 2021.

Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
3 
Appendix A: Participant list 
• 
Humpty Doo Barramundi 
• 
Petuna 
• 
Sydney Fish Markets 
• 
Southern Rock Lobster 
• 
Australian Barramundi Farmers Association 
• 
Western Rock Lobster Council 
• 
Oysters Australia 
• 
SA Oyster Growers 
• 
Tasmanian Salmon Growers Association 
• 
Geraldton Fisheries Group 
• 
NSW Professional Fishermen’s Association 
• 
Woolworths 
• 
Seafood Industry Australia 
• 
Fisheries Research Development Corporation 
• 
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission 
• 
DAWE Fisheries Branch 
• 
DAWE Agricultural Policy Division 
© Commonwealth of Australia 2021 
Unless otherwise noted, copyright (and any other intellectual property rights) in this publication is owned by the 
Commonwealth of Australia (referred to as the Commonwealth). 
All material in this publication is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Licence except content 
supplied by third parties, logos and the Commonwealth Coat of Arms. 
The Australian Government acting through the Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment has exercised due 
care and skill in preparing and compiling the information and data in this publication. Notwithstanding, the Department of 
Agriculture, Water and the Environment, its employees and advisers disclaim all liability, including liability for negligence 
and for any loss, damage, injury, expense or cost incurred by any person as a result of accessing, using or relying on any of 
the information or data in this publication to the maximum extent permitted by law.