Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
1 
Improving market transparency in perishable agricultural goods 
industries 
Red meat industry first workshop 5 October 2021: 
Workshop communique 
Background 
In late 2020, the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) conducted an inquiry into 
bargaining power imbalances in supply chains for perishable agricultural goods (PAG) in Australia. 
The inquiry recommended that the government explore measures to increase price transparency in 
PAG industries to increase competition in those industries. 
In response to this recommendation, the Australian Government, through the Department of 
Agriculture, Water and the Environment (DAWE) has committed $5.4 million to improve price and 
market transparency in PAG industries by: 
• 
delivering co-design workshops with PAG industries to understand their market transparency 
issues, opportunities and requirements 
• 
delivering a grants program to develop and implement tailored mechanisms to improve price and 
market transparency. 
The workshops provide an opportunity for participants to discuss price and market transparency 
issues in their sector, brainstorm ideas to improve transparency and co-design the details of solutions 
going forward. 
Workshop outcomes 
Eighteen industry and government representatives attended the first red meat price and market 
transparency workshop. The objective of the first workshop was to discover and analyse the issues, 
barriers and opportunities to increase market and price transparency in the red meat industry. 
Participants (Appendix A) worked in small groups that explored: 
• 
Issues – Negative characteristics within the red meat industry that decrease price and market 
transparency. 
• 
Barriers – Negative characteristics external to the red meat industry that decrease price and 
market transparency. 
• 
Internal opportunities – Positive characteristics that exist within the red meat industry that can 
potentially increase price and market transparency. 
• 
External opportunities – Positive characteristics outside the red meat industry that can 
potentially increase price and market transparency.

Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
2 
Throughout this process, issues and barriers (and consequently, opportunities) were categorised as 
either legislative, regulatory, industry specific, general process, technology driven, consumer driven 
and other (for example, environmental). 
The general view at the workshop was that price and market transparency was not a significant 
problem in the red meat industry and that other issues such as regulatory burden and cost were more 
significant factors and were being addressed outside this process. The industry has market 
transparency systems in place, with some opportunity to improve these existing systems. Participants 
felt that any new initiatives should not impose additional regulatory burden and should be cognisant 
of other factors (not directly linked to transparency) affecting the industry. 
Table 1 identifies and categorises the key themes of issues, barriers and opportunities from the 
workshop discussions. 
Table 1 Issues, barriers and opportunities 
Category 
Issue/Barrier 
Opportunity 
Technology driven 
MLA collect a lot of information. The 
information could be collected in more 
efficient ways. Some information is 
collected through paper-based processes 
and could be digitised. 
Digitise current information collection and 
reporting – new data out of scope. 
Industry specific 
Diversity and competition are strengths of 
the Australian market, but benefits may not 
always be recognised. Information that is 
better understood would improve 
confidence in integrity of supply chain. 
Uncertainty on best option for marketing 
products – weighing up which is the best 
card to play. Information could be 
consolidated to make better decisions and 
ensure consistency between platforms. 
Better understanding of information and 
benefits could assist producers’ decision 
making. 
PR/Media campaign on what is available. 
Consumable for all parts or supply chain, 
for example, independent retail butchers. 
Communicate to producers how to find and 
use information, including training in 
currently available systems. 
Industry specific 
There are parts of the sector that could be 
better served with a new market indicator, 
representing commodity price movement 
for producers of non-branded red meat 
products. 
New market index from existing data – 
Commodity Steer Feeder Index. 
Priority opportunities 
Several themes were drawn out from the opportunities identified. These were prioritised by 
participants with the Digitisation of data collection and Communications campaign being higher 
priority. 
Next steps 
The outcomes of the first workshop provide the basis for generating ideas for potential solutions to 
improve price and market transparency in the red meat industry. Ideas generation will be co-
designed by participants in the second workshop.

Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
3 
Appendix A: Participant list 
• 
Australian Lot Feeders’ Association 
• 
Live Export Council 
• 
Australian Meat Industry Council 
• 
Sheep Producers Australia 
• 
Red Meat Advisory Council 
• 
Meat & Livestock Australia 
• 
Australian Meat Processor Corporation 
• 
LiveCorp 
• 
Cattle Council of Australia 
• 
ALDI Supermarkets 
• 
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission 
• 
DAWE Agricultural Policy Division 
© Commonwealth of Australia 2021 
Unless otherwise noted, copyright (and any other intellectual property rights) in this publication is owned by the 
Commonwealth of Australia (referred to as the Commonwealth). 
All material in this publication is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Licence except content 
supplied by third parties, logos and the Commonwealth Coat of Arms. 
The Australian Government acting through the Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment has exercised due 
care and skill in preparing and compiling the information and data in this publication. Notwithstanding, the Department of 
Agriculture, Water and the Environment, its employees and advisers disclaim all liability, including liability for negligence 
and for any loss, damage, injury, expense or cost incurred by any person as a result of accessing, using or relying on any of 
the information or data in this publication to the maximum extent permitted by law.