Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
1 
Improving market transparency in perishable agricultural goods 
industries 
Wine grapes industry first workshop 17 August 2021: 
Workshop communique 
Background 
In late 2020, the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) conducted an inquiry into 
bargaining power imbalances in supply chains for perishable agricultural goods (PAG) in Australia. 
The inquiry recommended that the government explore measures to increase price transparency in 
PAG industries to increase competition in those industries. 
In response to this recommendation, the Australian Government, through the Department of 
Agriculture, Water and the Environment (DAWE), has committed $5.4 million to improve price and 
market transparency in PAG industries by: 
• 
delivering co-design workshops with PAG industries to understand their market transparency 
issues, opportunities and requirements 
• 
delivering a grants program to develop and implement tailored mechanisms to improve price and 
market transparency. 
The workshops provide an opportunity for participants to discuss price and market transparency 
issues in their sector, brainstorm ideas to improve transparency and co-design the details of solutions 
going forward. 
Workshop outcomes 
Sixteen industry and government representatives attended the first wine grapes price and market 
transparency workshop. The objective of the first workshop was to discover and analyse the issues, 
barriers and opportunities to achieve market and price transparency in the wine grapes industry. 
Participants (Appendix A) worked in small groups that explored: 
• 
Issues – Negative characteristics within the wine grapes industry that decrease price and market 
transparency. 
• 
Barriers – Negative characteristics external to the wine grapes industry that decrease price and 
market transparency. 
• 
Internal opportunities – Positive characteristics that exist within the wine grapes industry that 
can potentially increase price and market transparency. 
• 
External opportunities – Positive characteristics outside the wine grapes industry that can 
potentially increase price and market transparency.

Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
2 
Throughout this process, issues and barriers (and consequently, opportunities) were categorised as 
either legislative, regulatory, industry specific, general process, technology driven, consumer driven 
and other (for example, informational or political). Table 1 identifies and categorises the key themes 
of issues, barriers and opportunities from the workshop discussions. 
Table 1 Issues, barriers and opportunities 
Category 
Issue/Barrier 
Opportunity 
Technology/Information 
Interpretation and quality of 
supply/demand analysis of data; 
understanding price determinants; 
understanding the effect of global markets 
More powerful data analytics. 
Information 
Lack of information on pricing, stock, 
quality, end use of product; crush report 
has weighted data inputs; customer 
requirements not known before ready to 
harvest. 
More useful data made available and 
maintained by an independent body. 
Improve integrity of data currently 
available. 
Regulatory 
Industry code of conduct: poor 
participation and commitment to sign up; 
would benefit uncontracted growers. 
Strengthen Industry code of conduct: 
• Increase participation 
• Consider making mandatory 
Industry 
Different methods used to determine 
quality of product. 
Consistent approach to measuring the 
quality of product. 
Industry 
Many players in the supply chain using 
different models for contracting. 
Greater use of collective bargaining. 
Priority opportunities 
A number of themes were drawn out from the opportunities identified. These were prioritised by 
participants: 
• 
More powerful data analytics 
• 
Increase code of conduct participation/make code of conduct mandatory 
• 
Consistent approach to measuring quality of product 
• 
More useful data is made available and maintained by independent body 
• 
Improve integrity of data currently available 
• 
Collective bargaining 
Next steps 
The outcomes of the first workshop provide the basis for generating ideas for potential solutions to 
improve price and market transparency in the wine grapes industry. Ideas generation will be co-
designed by participants in Workshop 2 on 21 September 2021.

Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
3 
Appendix A: Participant list 
• 
Treasury Wine Estates 
• 
Australian Grape and Wine 
• 
Inland Wine Regions Alliance 
• 
Murray Valley Winegrowers Inc 
• 
Casella 
• 
Wine Australia 
• 
Pernod-Ricard Winemakers 
• 
Endeavor Group 
• 
Riverina Winegrape Growers/Wine Grapes Marketing Board 
• 
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission 
• 
DAWE Agricultural Policy Division 
© Commonwealth of Australia 2021 
Unless otherwise noted, copyright (and any other intellectual property rights) in this publication is owned by the 
Commonwealth of Australia (referred to as the Commonwealth). 
All material in this publication is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Licence except content 
supplied by third parties, logos and the Commonwealth Coat of Arms. 
The Australian Government acting through the Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment has exercised due 
care and skill in preparing and compiling the information and data in this publication. Notwithstanding, the Department of 
Agriculture, Water and the Environment, its employees and advisers disclaim all liability, including liability for negligence 
and for any loss, damage, injury, expense or cost incurred by any person as a result of accessing, using or relying on any of 
the information or data in this publication to the maximum extent permitted by law.