Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
1 
Improving market transparency in perishable agricultural goods 
industries 
Horticulture industry second workshop 
4 November2021: Workshop communique 
Background 
In late 2020, the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) conducted an inquiry into 
bargaining power imbalances in supply chains for perishable agricultural goods (PAG) in Australia. 
The inquiry recommended that the government explore measures to increase price transparency in 
PAG industries to increase competition in those industries. 
In response to this recommendation, the Australian Government, through the Department of 
Agriculture, Water and the Environment (DAWE) has committed $5.4 million to improve price and 
market transparency in PAG industries by: 
• 
delivering co-design workshops with PAG industries to understand their market transparency 
issues, opportunities and requirements 
• 
delivering a grants program to develop and implement tailored mechanisms to improve price and 
market transparency. 
The workshops provide an opportunity for participants to discuss price and market transparency 
issues in their sector, brainstorm ideas to improve transparency and co-design the details of solutions 
going forward. 
Workshop 2 outcomes 
Twenty-two industry and government representatives attended the second horticulture price and 
market transparency workshop. The objective of the second workshop was to generate ideas that 
form the basis for potential projects for the grants program, and to identify further areas of work that 
can be undertaken outside of this program. 
Prior to breaking out into small groups Horticulture Innovation Australia provided an overview of the 
following projects:  
1) Harvest to Home – Insights from consumer market data. 
2) Feasibility study to collect and report wholesale market price information for the Australian 
vegetable industry.

Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
2 
Participants (Appendix A) worked in small groups on the following opportunities that were 
prioritised through a poll available to participants after the first workshop. This poll was open from 
25 – 29 October. 
1) Technology to capture, analyse and report accurate and timely data 
2) Education campaign on using market information 
3) Mapping the supply chain and drivers/influences at each point. 
Participants were placed into working groups, with the aim of generating ideas for potential projects. 
The whole group then came together to consider each idea including purpose, details, stakeholders, 
risks and benefits and next steps. Groups presented to each other to gather further input, look at next 
steps and prioritise which project should be progressed, for either application to grants funding 
during the first half of 2022, or for industry-led development. 
Table 1 provides an overview of the potential projects that were prioritised by participants’ votes. 
At the end of the workshop, participants were asked to select their preferred project to be progressed 
either by industry or through a future government grant funding round. Participants nominated to 
add a fourth option, which was combining all projects due the similarity of their nature. 
The participants prioritised projects in the following order: 
1) Tie all three projects into one project starting with feasibility study – 43% (7 votes) 
2) Education campaign and survey – 31% (5 votes) 
3) Technology - real-time market data, trading platform – 25% (4 votes) 
4) Mapping across the supply chain – 0% (0 votes) 
Next steps 
The next steps for the horticulture industry are to create a working group with representatives from 
across the supply chain, discuss and further map out the project concepts and then put a grants 
application together once the grants round opens. The first step for any project is to conduct a scoping 
study, with the project driven by industry. 
Horticulture Innovation Australia has offered to work with key stakeholders to produce a plan on a 
page and collaborate with representatives who attended the workshops.

Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
3 
Table 1 – Potential projects 
Project 
Scope and risks 
Stakeholders and resourcing 
Next steps 
Technology to capture, analyse 
and report accurate and timely 
data 
Real time market data that will: 
• Improve Return on 
Investment for growers 
• Assist in locating fair price 
through live data access 
• Benchmark pricing for 
growers to demonstrate 
their bottom line. 
• Provide information for 
better decision making and 
allow for short to medium 
term planning decisions 
• Have flexibility to use the 
right data for decisions as 
different products have 
different data requirements 
• Manage supply against 
demand and avoid 
oversupply in any market. 
Scope 
A scoping exercise via a feasibility study – engaging 
with industry – will help to determine what is 
possible and identify the existing capabilities that can 
be leveraged. 
Considerations include: 
• Current yearly data reported quarterly 
• Reduce the lag time in data reporting 
• Data is currently captured with information 
gathered from provided inputs rather than raw 
data. 
• Live data will build trust by demonstrating that 
trend data over time helps to build decision 
making ability and will assist industry to 
elevate its critical planning 
• Adding volumes to prices in current reporting 
for which the sector needs to collect better data 
• Incorporation data that sits with credit services 
within markets as clearing houses manage the 
transactions. 
Risks and mitigation strategies 
Lack of engagement (continued engagement with 
users and industry). 
Clarity of information to frame scoping study (define 
information needs/expectations from industry in 
study). 
Focus is heavily reliant on market credit services 
(ensure multiple data sources are reviewed). 
Trying too much and failing (narrow the focus of 
study using phases: requirements of users; review 
available sources). 
Adoption and industry acceptance (able to evolve as 
tool with users and build trust with users). 
Playing the short game (clear strategy and roadmap). 
Stakeholders 
The following stakeholders that need to be 
considered for consultation and collaboration 
include: 
• Growers/producers 
• Market credit services 
• Market wholesalers 
• Industry organisations and associations 
• Major retailers 
• Exporters. 
Resourcing 
Funding and resourcing will need to be costed for: 
• Sourcing data from market credit services 
(60-80%) and other data sources 
• Scoping service provider 
• Commissioning a study through an 
independent body 
• Establishing the right working group from 
key industry stakeholders. 
A feasibility study in the first 
instance will map out the 
requirements of the project.

Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
4 
Project 
Scope and risks 
Stakeholders and resourcing 
Next steps 
Education campaign on using 
market information 
Education campaign to drive 
awareness of available market 
information, enable practical 
application of knowledge and 
facilitate better business 
decisions. 
The project would have four 
stages: 
1) A needs analysis, which 
could be done through 
industry wide surveys to 
identify gaps, demonstrate 
reach and inform delivery 
platforms. 
2) Develop options to deliver 
the campaign and package 
resources for the campaign. 
3) Deliver the campaign 
through existing networks 
and include development of 
a toolbox of ideas that can 
continue to be delivered 
after the initial campaign. 
4) Ongoing delivery of 
education by industry 
organisations after the initial 
campaign  
Scope 
The scope of this project would be developed via a 
survey. 
Considerations include: 
• Education on existing market information 
• Business practices, for example, using the code 
of conduct and contracts effectively 
• Consistent use of product standards 
• Fundamentals of supply and demand. 
Project delivery would leverage existing networks 
and relationships, including industry liaison people, 
regional associations and growers’ groups, and 
existing events and seminars, and using thought 
leaders and industry champions respected by peers. 
Risks and mitigation strategies 
Survey is deficient due to insufficient reach, 
underfunded, side-tracked by agendas, could lead to 
wrong product being delivered (survey design and 
delivery is critical: outsource survey design in 
collaboration with industry). 
Risk of overwhelming people with too much 
information (leverage existing resources and 
networks, prioritise topics). 
Lack of buy-in from constituents (industry 
leadership; need peak bodies to get behind it). 
Campaign stops when grant money runs out 
(industry leadership, develop toolbox of ideas 
including train the trainer). 
Stakeholders 
Requires a coordinated approach led by 
Horticulture Innovation Australia and peak bodies 
as they hold much of the existing information and 
have existing connections with regional groups. 
Produce Marketing Australia and the Fresh 
Markets Associations are key players, for their 
networks and information. 
State government agricultural departments will be 
informed so they have awareness of the project. 
Training providers such as Primary Industries 
Education Foundation Australia and the Council of 
Deans in Agriculture could potentially include the 
training package in their existing curricula for farm 
business courses. 
The target audience is growers as a key beneficiary, 
with value extending across supply chain, 
particularly to small business. 
Resourcing 
Funding would be required to: 
• Engage third party provider to develop 
survey, coordinate and package up education 
resources for delivery and develop options 
on how to deliver 
• Develop toolbox of ideas for ongoing 
delivery. 
Consultation with the following stakeholders 
includes: 
• Collaboration with industry groups 
• Surveying industry to identify training needs 
• Peak bodies that have existing 
communication programs, which could be 
leveraged to provide ongoing delivery 
• Education providers that cater for farm 
business courses. 
The first step is to develop 
the survey, engaging an 
expert to design and deliver 
it. 
Horticulture Innovation 
Australia and industry 
bodies would lead this 
project.

Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
5 
Project 
Scope and risks 
Stakeholders and resourcing 
Next steps 
Mapping the supply chain and 
drivers/influences at each 
point 
Scope how best to map the 
supply chain to: 
• Improve transparency of 
where cost is coming 
from/attributed 
• Improve transparency of 
where product 
held/additional costs are 
applied 
• Improve transparency in 
supply chains for domestic 
versus imported products 
• Provide visibility of the 
supply chain as a whole and 
consequently reduce waste 
• Drive positive change 
throughout the supply chain 
• Provide a reference point 
and trends to growers 
• Assist with forward 
planning for planting by 
providing signals to the 
market 
• Understand where 
ownership changes hands 
and transfer of risk. 
Scope 
The scope includes the end-end supply chain from 
farmer through to consumer, and needs to consider 
the complexity of the horticulture industry. For 
example, the inclusion of planting data would be 
dependent on the sector of industry. 
Considerations include: 
• seasonal impacts and external events 
• cost of production from farmers 
• cost of wholesale and retail 
• include points where ownership of product 
changes hands (take on risk) 
• volume of produce from farms 
Risks and mitigation strategies 
Inaccurate data (use multiple sources of data and 
cross check, communicate the benefits of providing 
accurate data). 
Inaccessible data; unwilling to provide; non-
participation (independent collection, communicate 
the benefits, demonstrate the usefulness of providing 
data, voluntary approach to start). 
Privacy issues (individual data protections, privacy 
checks, trusted communication conduits). 
Commercial sensitivities (use trends data, aggregated 
data to de-identify source, independent data 
collection). 
Skillsets to run the project (get experts in to provide 
advice). 
Stakeholders 
The stakeholders that would be involved in 
consultation and development would comprise a 
committee representative across the sector, 
including relevant parties in the supply chain: 
• farmers/growers 
• wholesalers 
• retailers 
• ABARES 
• Australian Horticultural Exporters and 
Importers Association, and 
• industry bodies. 
The stakeholders involved in implementing a 
mapping mechanism would include: 
• 3rd party commercial providers 
• Horticulture Innovation Australia to oversee 
and manage the contract for the 3rd party 
• An independent body that can oversee 
over/under supply data. 
Resourcing 
The following resources would require funding: 
• 3rd party to consult and develop a mapping 
mechanism 
• Independent party to implement 
Data can be sourced from the following: 
• Levy Revenue Service 
• Government – ABS, ABARES, ATO, State and 
Territory departments of agriculture 
• AusMarket’s data and Neilson data 
• Industry: growers, wholesalers, retailers, 
industry bodies and associations 
This project requires further 
scoping and can be 
incorporated into a 
feasibility study being 
proposed for a technology 
solution to capture and 
analyse market information. 
A first step would be to 
develop a business analysis 
flowchart. 
This project could 
potentially provide trend 
data that is made available 
on a technology platform.

Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
6 
Appendix A: Participant organisation 
• 
ALDI 
• 
Alfred E Chave (Brisbane Markets) 
• 
AusVeg 
• 
Avocados Australia 
• 
Berries Australia 
• 
Fresh Markets Australia 
• 
Horticulture Innovation Australia 
• 
Melons Australia 
• 
NSW Farmers Association 
• 
Optomni 
• 
Summerfruit Australia 
• 
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission 
• 
DAWE Agricultural Policy Division 
• 
ABARES 
© Commonwealth of Australia 2021 
Unless otherwise noted, copyright (and any other intellectual property rights) in this publication is owned by the 
Commonwealth of Australia (referred to as the Commonwealth). 
All material in this publication is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Licence except content 
supplied by third parties, logos and the Commonwealth Coat of Arms. 
The Australian Government acting through the Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment has exercised due 
care and skill in preparing and compiling the information and data in this publication. Notwithstanding, the Department of 
Agriculture, Water and the Environment, its employees and advisers disclaim all liability, including liability for negligence 
and for any loss, damage, injury, expense or cost incurred by any person as a result of accessing, using or relying on any of 
the information or data in this publication to the maximum extent permitted by law.