Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
1 
Improving market transparency in perishable agricultural goods 
industries 
Wine grapes industry second workshop 
21 September 2021: Workshop communique 
Background 
In late 2020, the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) conducted an inquiry into 
bargaining power imbalances in supply chains for perishable agricultural goods (PAG) in Australia. 
The inquiry recommended that the government explore measures to increase price transparency in 
PAG industries to increase competition in those industries. 
In response to this recommendation, the Australian Government, through the Department of 
Agriculture, Water and the Environment (DAWE), has committed $5.4 million to improve price and 
market transparency in PAG industries by: 
• 
delivering co-design workshops with PAG industries to understand their market transparency 
issues, opportunities and requirements 
• 
delivering a grants program to develop and implement tailored mechanisms to improve price and 
market transparency. 
The workshops provide an opportunity for participants to discuss price and market transparency 
issues in their sector, brainstorm ideas to improve transparency and co-design the details of solutions 
going forward. 
Workshop 2 outcomes 
Eighteen industry and government representatives attended the second wine grape price and market 
transparency workshop. The objective of the second workshop was to generate ideas that form the 
basis for potential projects for the grants program, and to identify further areas of work that can be 
undertaken outside of this program. 
Prior to breaking out into small groups, 2 organisations provided an overview of some projects 
underway within the industry: 
• 
Australian Grape and Wine – Current voluntary wine industry code of conduct. 
• 
Australian Wine Research Institute – Developing objective measures for grape quality 
assessment.

Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
2 
Participants (Appendix A) worked in small groups on the following opportunities that had been 
prioritised in the first workshop: 
1) More powerful analytics 
2) Increase Code of Conduct participation. 
Individuals self-selected into working groups to generate ideas for potential projects. The whole 
group then came together to consider each idea including purpose, details, stakeholders, risks and 
benefits, and next steps. Groups presented to each other to gather further input, look at next steps and 
prioritise which project should be progressed, for either application to grants funding during the first 
half of 2022, or for industry-led development. 
Table 1 provides an overview of the potential projects that were prioritised by participants’ vote. 
At the end of the workshop, participants were asked to select their preferred project to be progressed 
either by industry or through a future government grant funding round. Participants generally 
favoured the Digital Analytics Platform project. 
1) Digital analytics platform (64%). 
2) Code Awareness & Education Campaign (36%). 
Next steps 
We recommend that Wine Australia and Australian Grape & Wine continue to engage and collaborate 
with key stakeholders in the industry to further develop respective proposals for grant funding, or to 
develop a business case for the industry to lead the development of projects.

Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
3 
Table 1 Potential projects 
Project  
Key purpose, risks and benefits 
Stakeholders and resourcing 
Next steps 
Digital analytics platform 
An interactive web-based platform 
that provides an objective perspective 
of pricing. 
The project would have 3 phases, 
pending outcomes of a feasibility 
study: 
1) Feasibility study 
2) Collection of data 
3) Build econometric model for price 
determination and a web platform 
Data collection would include the 
whole industry. Price determination 
econometrics would apply to warm 
inland region wine grapes only. 
Data collected would include price 
points, volumes, varieties, consumer 
retail data and inventory levels. 
It may also include export data, 
exchange rates and data on factors that 
affect supply such as environmental 
data, freight costs, etc. 
A web-based platform similar to 
existing Wine Australia dashboards 
would make the tool accessible to 
users and allow users to input their 
own data. 
The development of an app accessible 
from smart phones could also be 
explored. 
Purpose 
Introduce an objective perspective of pricing to: 
• allow better informed decisions such as 
forward planning and general management 
• enable fairer negotiations 
• address information asymmetries 
• provide more timely and accurate data. 
Allow better understanding of markets and 
prediction of trends based on real time information 
on what is selling at what price 
Address the current gap in accessibility of data on 
the domestic market 
Risks and mitigation strategies 
Availability of accurate data. Tools are only as good 
as the underlying data – imperfect data can still 
provide useful insights. 
Differences in pricing of premium and commodity 
market could lead to oversimplified results – data 
would need to be collected for the entire industry 
and differences built into model to determine price 
range for warm inland region wine grapes. 
International factors influence pricing and are 
complex. 
Additional survey to obtain data may be burdensome 
– may be ways to streamline surveys. 
Data on inventory levels are at a point in time (c.f. 
the USA which has a running track of inventory). 
Benefits 
Growers are better informed on pricing leading to 
better informed decisions on managing their 
businesses. 
Addresses information asymmetries, allowing for 
more balanced negotiating positions. 
Provides more timely information on pricing and 
trends. 
Stakeholders 
Wine Australia would be the appropriate body to 
manage the project and resulting tool. Wine 
Australia would need to go out to tender to obtain 
the appropriate expertise to build the econometric 
model. 
Wine Australia already collate vintage data and 
hold data on exports wine production, sales and 
inventory.  
Wine Australia also has existing dashboards for 
export, the national vintage survey, market 
explorer, and wine geographical indications 
Australian Grape & Wine would be a key partner 
and would manage industry reference groups. 
Data inputs may be required from other 
organisations, such as consumer data or data 
affecting supply (environmental, shipping, etc) 
Resourcing 
Funding and resourcing will need to be costed for: 
• conducting a feasibility study 
• collecting data from existing sources 
(domestic first) 
• building econometric model 
• building and maintaining a web-based 
platform and possible smart phone app. 
Existing data held by Wine Australia includes:  
• export data 
• global supply monitor 
• global trade atlas 
• national vintage survey 
• inventory levels. 
Data may be available from other sources: 
• environmental information 
• exchange rates 
• logistics (for example, freight, shipping) 
• consumer retail data. 
Proof of concept 
• What information is 
available 
• Who would collect the 
data 
• How complicated  
• How accurate 
• How well data could be 
analysed 
Wine Australia as an 
independent organisation 
would have the role of data 
collection. 
Australian Grape and Wine 
industry reference groups to 
enable stakeholder 
representation from all 
regions (especially warm 
inland regions).

Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
4 
 
Project 
Key purpose, risks and benefits 
Stakeholders and resourcing 
Next steps 
Code of conduct awareness and 
education campaign 
An awareness raising educative 
campaign to highlight the benefits 
and scope of the Code. 
Educate for a better understanding 
of dispute resolution mechanism, 
contracts and the research 
component within the industry. 
To include material such as case 
studies, how-to guides, contract 
templates, podcasts, dedicated web 
hosting of material. 
Badging ‘I’ve signed up to the Code’ 
to promote the code within 
industry. 
Purpose 
Improving relationships between growers and makers and 
putting everyone on the same level/playing field. 
Generate trust in the Code as effective, working well and 
knowing the boundaries within which to operate. 
Create a pool of experts adequately trained in applying the 
code. 
Raising awareness that participation in the Code is a part of 
being a professional industry. 
Increasing transparency in pricing and thereby increase 
competition. 
Risks and mitigation strategies 
Funding to resource a campaign is insufficient – have well 
prepared proposal for funding. 
Timing of delivery of campaign is mis-aligned – be flexible 
with timing of delivering the campaign. 
No more adoption of the Code by industry – set realistic, 
achievable milestones and KPIs, demonstrating transparency 
in the process, messaging benefits. 
Relationship breakdown with oversupply situation – 
demonstrate through case studies when and how the code 
has worked well. 
Poor targeting of campaign – audience, channels, messaging – 
co-develop and build in success measurements. 
Benefits 
The following benefits of having a high level of participation 
in the Code include: 
• a united industry 
• improved relationships with more certainty in 
commercial relationships leading to an increase in 
resilience within the industry 
• reduced costs to business and improve efficiency 
• access to resources and an increase in expert resources 
• reduced cost to dispute resolution and access to the 
process. 
Stakeholders 
Australian Grape and Wine have an obligation 
to manage the process for the code of conduct, 
noting that the Code Management Committee 
sits with them. 
Collaboration with: 
• AWRI regarding technical issues 
• Wine Australia regarding funding 
• Regional associations regarding 
connecting to wine grower networks to 
deliver training 
• Signatories to the Code regarding 
including them in education workshops 
• Department of Agriculture, Water and 
the Environment wine team regarding 
policy clarity 
• ACCC regarding legal clarity. 
Resourcing 
Funding and resourcing (skills) will need to 
be costed for: 
• development and delivery of training 
and training materials – contingencies 
for both in-person and virtual delivery 
• development of how-to guides and case 
studies, guides to explain research 
• hosting material on a website 
• preparation of podcasts 
• development and delivery of a ‘I’ve 
signed up to the Code’ campaign. 
Australian Grape & Wine to 
further develop a proposal 
for grants funding with 
comprehensive consultation 
with key industry 
stakeholders.

Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
5 
Appendix A: Participant list 
• 
Treasury Wine Estates 
• 
Australian Grape and Wine 
• 
Inland Wine Regions Alliance 
• 
Murray Valley Winegrowers Inc 
• 
Casella 
• 
Wine Australia 
• 
Pernod-Ricard Winemakers 
• 
Endeavor Group 
• 
Riverina Winegrape Growers/Wine Grapes Marketing Board 
• 
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission 
• 
DAWE Agricultural Policy Division 
© Commonwealth of Australia 2021 
Unless otherwise noted, copyright (and any other intellectual property rights) in this publication is owned by the Commonwealth of 
Australia (referred to as the Commonwealth). 
All material in this publication is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Licence except content supplied 
by third parties, logos and the Commonwealth Coat of Arms. 
The Australian Government acting through the Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment has exercised due care and 
skill in preparing and compiling the information and data in this publication. Notwithstanding, the Department of Agriculture, 
Water and the Environment, its employees and advisers disclaim all liability, including liability for negligence and for any loss, 
damage, injury, expense or cost incurred by any person as a result of accessing, using or relying on any of the information or data in 
this publication to the maximum extent permitted by law.