2022-2027

MONITORING AND EVALUATION PLAN

Ongoing monitoring of AQUAPLAN’s progress will ensure the plan achieves it objectives and that any 

issues that threaten its progress are addressed quickly. Activities will be prioritised throughout the 

life of plan to ensure limited available resources are effectively and efficiently allocated. Evaluation of 

the plan and each activity will examine if the desired outcomes were achieved, what worked and what 

didn’t, and provide a path to build on the work to provide lasting benefits. 

MONITOR & PRIORITISE  

The AQUAPLAN executive office will monitor progress of AQUAPLAN together 

with stakeholders. The aim is to ensure AQUAPLAN produces meaningful 

outcomes to improve aquatic animal health. To achieve this:

•	 Each calendar year, annual priorities for AQUAPLAN activities will be set. 

•	 A mid-term review will examine progress and confirm priorities for the 

second half of the plan’s term. 

RESOURCE

•	 AQUAPLAN has been designed to attract resources, both direct and in-kind, 

by establishing agreed national priorities for industry and governments. 

•	 Activity leads will be responsible for seeking resources for their activities.

•	 The AQUAPLAN executive office can assist activity leads to identify funding 

sources. 

•	 Progress towards attracting funding towards priority activities will also be 

monitored to ensure difficulties are identified and resolved early. 

REPORT

•	 Reporting and engaging with all stakeholders about AQUAPLAN 

implementation will be conducted as per the AQUAPLAN Communication 

and Engagement Plan. 

•	 Activity leads will provide biannual progress reports which will inform 

AQUAPLAN updates to all stakeholders. AQUAPLAN executive office will 

coordinate this process. 

•	 The AQUAPLAN executive office will provide annual AQUAPLAN 

implementation progress reports to all stakeholders.

EVALUATE

The impact of AQUAPLAN will be evaluated through: 

•	 longitudinal impact surveys, a mid-term review, and end of plan review. These 

will involve all stakeholders and will be led the AQUAPLAN executive office. 

•	 Activity leads will develop evaluation plans for each AQUAPLAN activity. 

Activities will not be considered complete until this has occurred. 

$