Australia’s National Strategic Plan for 
Aquatic Animal Health 1998–2003

AQUAPLAN outlines Australia’s national strategic plan for aquatic animal health. It was jointly
developed by State, Territory and Commonwealth Governments, and private industry sectors.
The production of this AQUAPLAN brochure was coordinated by the National Office of Animal
on behalf of the Fish Health Management Committee.
Ministerial Council on Forestry, Fisheries and Aquaculture endorsed AQUAPLAN, April 1999.
© Commonwealth of Australia 1999
ISBN 0642 41407 6
unaltered form only (retaining this notice) for non-commercial use. Apart from any use as
concerning reproduction and rights should be addressed to the Manager, Legislative Services,
This material is general in nature. It is made available on the understanding that the
Commonwealth is not thereby engaged in rendering professional advice. In some cases 
the material may incorporate or summarise views, standards or recommendations of 
third parties. Such material is assembled in good faith, but does not necessarily reflect 
the considered views of the Commonwealth, or indicate a commitment to a particular 
course of action.
For further information regarding AQUAPLAN please contact:
Aquatic Animal Health Unit
National Office of Animal and Plant Health
Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry — Australia
GPO Box 858
Canberra, ACT 2601
Phone: 02 6272 4328

3
Australia's fisheries and aquaculture industries are a rapidly growing sector of our
primary industries.  Their capacity to contribute through export earnings and job
creation especially in regional Australia is a vital part of our future prosperity.
Australia is fortunate to have our aquatic animal sector free from many diseases
that occur elsewhere in the world and this provides us with a comparative advantage
in both production and trade. Australia's capacity to produce “clean green” seafood
of superior quality allows ready access to overseas markets, enhances
competitiveness and also provides value adding through the capacity to attract
premium prices.
It is vital for Australia to maintain this disease free status and I am pleased therefore
to release AQUAPLAN, Australia's five year National Strategic Plan for Aquatic
Animal Health.  AQUAPLAN is a comprehensive document describing initiatives
ranging from border controls and import certification through to enhanced
veterinary education and improved capacity to manage incursions of exotic diseases.
The eight programs described in this plan represent a world first in proactive
management of aquatic animal health.
I am pleased to see that industry and government, in working together on the
development of AQUAPLAN, have recognised the importance of an integrated and
planned approach on aquatic animal health.
Implementation of the strategic directions in AQUAPLAN will build on the efforts
of industry and government to date and ensure profitable and sustainable
development of Australia's fisheries and aquaculture industries. 
Warren Truss
Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry
September 1999

4

5
AQUAPLAN is a broad, comprehensive strategy that outlines objectives and projects
to develop a national approach to emergency preparedness and response and to the
overall management of aquatic animal health in Australia.
AQUAPLAN was developed in response to the Report of the National Task Force 
on Imported Fish and Fish Products (1996) and Australian Quarantine: A Shared
Responsibility (1996). Funding was allocated to the Commonwealth Department of
Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry — Australia, AFFA (previously the Commonwealth
Department of Primary Industries and Energy) to coordinate the development of a
strategic plan for aquatic animal health management.
AQUAPLAN has been jointly developed by Government and private industry sectors
and seeks to build and enhance capacity for the management of aquatic animal
health. It has been developed in a manner consistent with existing arrangements in
the terrestrial animal sector and, wherever possible, links into existing
State/Territory Government and industry health management arrangements.
The Ministerially appointed Fish Health Management Committee (FHMC) is the body
which oversees the development of AQUAPLAN. The FHMC is chaired by Gardner
Murray, the Managing Director of the National Offices of Animal and Plant Health
and Food Safety and comprises representatives from the Standing Committee on
Agriculture and Resource Management (SCARM), the Standing Committee on
Fisheries and Aquaculture (SCFA), the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial
Research Organisation (CSIRO) Animal Health, the Australian Seafood Industry
Council (ASIC), recreational fisheries (RecFish Australia) and representatives from the
peak aquaculture industry bodies of Australia.
AQUAPLAN comprises eight key programs under which government and private
sectors have identified priority projects to achieve the program objectives. Together
these objectives will assist in maximising Australia’s ability to control aquatic
animal disease outbreaks, maintain market access, support quality assurance and
improve the productivity and sustainability of Australia’s aquatic animal production
industries. Wherever possible, AQUAPLAN projects link into existing terrestrial
animal health arrangements in order to avoid duplication and to maximise sensible
use of resources.

6
The eight key AQUAPLAN programs are:
1. International Linkages
2. Quarantine
1
3. Surveillance, Monitoring and Reporting
4. Preparedness and Response
5. Awareness
6. Research and Development
7. Legislation, Policies and Jurisdiction
8. Resources and Funding.
Program four of AQUAPLAN, Preparedness and Response includes the development
of AQUAVETPLAN, an aquatic animal disease veterinary emergency plan.
AQUAVETPLAN is based on the existing terrestrial animal emergency disease
management plan, AUSVETPLAN which was conceptualised in the late 1970s and
became operational in 1991. AQUAVETPLAN will comprise a series of manuals
outlining emergency preparedness and response and control strategies for aquatic
animal disease emergencies in Australia.
This document represents an outline of the strategic approach, agreed upon by
private industry sectors and government and endorsed by the FHMC, to manage
aquatic animal health in Australia for the next five years. Adjustments to
AQUAPLAN may become necessary as progress is reviewed. Updates and progress
reports will be provided to stakeholders through the FHMC.
For further information regarding AQUAPLAN please contact:
Aquatic Animal Health Unit
National Office of Animal and Plant Health
Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry — Australia
GPO Box 858
Canberra, ACT 2611
Phone: 02 6272 4328
1 Given the statutory nature of international quarantine under the Quarantine Act 1908, the Australian Quarantine and
Inspection Service has primary carriage for this AQUAPLAN Program

7
FOREWORD
3
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
5
TABLE OF CONTENTS
7
AQUAPLAN - THE BACKGROUND
9
AQUAPLAN - THE DIRECTION FOR THE FUTURE
11
THE EIGHT PROGRAMS OF AQUAPLAN
11
REVIEW AND EVALUATION OF PROGRESS
12
PROGRAM 1 - INTERNATIONAL LINKAGES
13
CURRENT STATUS
13
KEY ISSUES
14
Project 1.1. Regional Cooperation on Technical Standards
14
Project 1.2. OIE Disease Categorisation
14
Project 1.3. International Disease Reporting
14
PROGRAM 2 - QUARANTINE
15
CURRENT STATUS
15
KEY ISSUES
16
Project 2.1. Import Risk Analysis for Imported Aquatic Animals and 
Aquatic Animal Products and Quarantine
16
Project 2.2. Quarantine
16
Project 2.3. Quarantine Import Reporting
17
PROGRAM 3 - SURVEILLANCE, MONITORING AND REPORTING
18
CURRENT STATUS
18
KEY ISSUES
19
Project 3.1. Surveillance and Monitoring for Aquatic Animal Diseases
19
Project 3.2. Reporting Arrangements
19
Project 3.3. Zoning for Aquatic Animal Diseases
20
PROGRAM 4 - PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE
21
CURRENT STATUS
21
KEY ISSUES
22
Project 4.1. Consultative Committee on Emergency Animal Diseases (CCEAD)
22
Project 4.2. AQUAVETPLAN
22

8
PROGRAM 5 - AWARENESS
23
CURRENT STATUS
23
KEY ISSUES
25
Project 5.1. Public Awareness and Communication
25
Project 5.2. Education and Training
25
Project 5.3. Extension Services
25
Project 5.4. Quality Assurance and Food Safety
25
PROGRAM 6 - RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
26
CURRENT STATUS
26
KEY ISSUES
27
Project 6.1. Strategic Plan for Focussed and Prioritised Research
27
Project 6.2. Specific Research Needs
27
PROGRAM 7 - LEGISLATION, POLICIES AND JURISDICTION
28
CURRENT STATUS
28
KEY ISSUES
29
Project 7.1. Legislation, Policies and Jurisdiction
29
Project 7.2. Translocation
29
PROGRAM 8 - RESOURCES AND FUNDING
30
CURRENT STATUS
30
KEY ISSUES
31
Project 8.1. On-Going Funding Arrangements for AQUAPLAN
31
Project 8.2. Funding to Underpin Aquatic Animal Disease 
Emergency Response Arrangements (AQUAVETPLAN)
31
Project 8.3. Continuing Funding to Support Disease Monitoring and 
Surveillance and Reporting Activities
31
Project 8.4. Continuing Funding to Support Development of Awareness 
and Promotion for Aquatic Animal Diseases
31
Project 8.5.  Evaluate the Potential for Insurance Companies and 
Underwriters to provide Compensation Coverage
32
LIST OF ACRONYMS
33
CONTACTS
34

9
In November 1995, the Standing Committee on Fisheries and Aquaculture (SCFA)
reported to the Ministerial Council on Forestry, Fisheries and Aquaculture (MCFFA)
that priority should be given to developing a national response mechanism for
fisheries and aquaculture emergencies. Several comprehensive reviews have since
been formally tabled within Australia; they critically assess, and make
recommendations for, Australia’s national response to fisheries and aquaculture
emergencies2, Australia’s quarantine including aquatic animal quarantine3,4,
imported fish and fish products5, and management of incursions of pests, weeds 
and diseases6.
issues to ensure the effective and sustainable development and profitability of
Australia’s aquatic animal industries. In this context, the prevention and
management of diseases are of paramount importance. In 1997, following a Cabinet
decision relating to the various reports (see footnotes), the Federal Government
allotted $6.7 million dollars over four years to the then Commonwealth Department
Forestry — Australia (AFFA) to implement the recommendations of both reports and
develop a comprehensive aquatic animal health plan for Australia. Within AFFA, the
Fisheries and Aquaculture Branch (FAB) and the Aquatic Animal Health Unit of the
Office of the Australian Chief Veterinary Officer, now National Office of Animal and
Plant Health (NOAPH) coordinated the drafting of such a plan (AQUAPLAN) and,
together with the Australian Quarantine and Inspection Service (AQIS) and the
former Animal and Plant Health Branch of the Bureau of Resource Sciences
commenced work on the specific tasks identified in the Nairn3 and Higgins5 reports.
2  Jones 1995: Managing the National Response to Fisheries and Aquaculture Emergencies
3  Nairn, M. E., Allen, P. G., Inglis, A. R. and Tanner C. 1996: Australian Quarantine: a shared responsibility. 
Department of Primary Industries and Energy, Canberra. 284pp – 
website: http://www.dpie.gov.au/dpie/committee/quarantine/report/quarrev.html
4  Nunn, M. J. 1995: Aquatic Animal Quarantine in Australia: Report of the Scientific Working Party on Aquatic Animal
Quarantine. Bureau of Resource Sciences, Canberra. 45pp.
5  Higgins, R. A. (chair) 1996: Report of the National Task Force on Imported Fish and Fish Products.
Department of Primary Industries and Energy, Canberra. 269 pp – 
website: http://www.affa.gov.au/fisheries/imports/taskforce/index.html
6  Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture and Resource Management’s Task Force into Managing 
Incursions of Aquatic Pests, Weeds and Diseases: 1997.
The Background

10
The Ministerially appointed Australian Fish Health Management Committee (FHMC)
convened a meeting of Commonwealth and State/Territory delegates and key
private industry sector representatives from April 28th to 29th, 1998, to gain the
views of a broader spectrum of stakeholders on the draft plan, especially to seek
agreement on the main objectives, and to critically assess whether those objectives
would be met by the outlined draft strategy. FHMC is chaired by the Managing
Director of the National Offices of Animal and Plant Health and Food Safety and
comprises representatives from the Standing Committee on Agriculture and
Resource Management (SCARM), SCFA, the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial
Research Organisation (CSIRO) Animal Health, the Australian Seafood Industry
Council (ASIC), recreational fisheries (RecFish Australia) and representatives from the
peak aquaculture industry bodies of Australia. The meeting was held as a strategic
planning workshop, with four working groups presenting their findings to the
plenum and FHMC. Directly afterwards, FHMC members met, endorsed AQUAPLAN
and set the steps for future progress.
This document represents an outline of the approach, agreed upon by industries
and Governments and endorsed by FHMC, on a five-year strategy to manage aquatic
animal health in Australia.

11
This summary document represents an outline of the strategic approach, agreed
upon by industries and Governments and endorsed by the Fish Health Management
Committee, to manage aquatic animal health in Australia for the next five years.
Adjustments to AQUAPLAN may become necessary as progress is reviewed. Updates
and progress reports will be provided to stakeholders through the FHMC.
The eight programs of AQUAPLAN
There are numerous issues for a national aquatic animal health plan, and there are
various ways to group them. Inherently, these issues do not stand alone; rather do
they interrelate closely and widely. Thus, AQUAPLAN may be thought of as a net
consisting of many different issues connected by a web-like structure of lines. For
practicality, these issues have been grouped into larger programs, with a
manageable number of projects for each.
AQUAPLAN consists of eight programs covering:
AQUAPLAN is a strategic plan. The eight programs provide the necessary framework
to develop and implement comprehensive operational plans for aquatic animal
health issues. Each program consists of specific projects and project components,
which have been identified as the most effective means of meeting the program
objectives. ‘Drivers’ for the individual projects and components must be identified,
and detailed business plans and operational plans need to be developed. Most
projects have commenced and are well underway.
The Direction for the Future
1. International Linkages
2. Quarantine
3. Surveillance, Monitoring and Reporting
4. Preparedness and Response Arrangements
5. Awareness
6. Research and Development
7. Legislation, Policies and Jurisdiction
8. Resources and Funding

12
Review and evaluation of progress
The success of AQUAPLAN is dependent on a sustained sense of ownership and
collaborative approach at all levels of Government and industry. The realisation of
many projects primarily relies on the leadership and input of the private sectors.
A formal review and evaluation process has been developed by FHMC. This process
will be implemented to ensure the timely delivery of project outputs, and a
continuous fine-tuning of objectives as well as the means to meet them.
Meeting the objectives of AQUAPLAN will result in improved aquatic animal health
management in Australia. Wild capture fisheries and aquaculture will benefit, as
well as the ornamental fish sector and recreational fisheries, through increased
productivity, improved sustainability of aquaculture, improved market access and
better protection for our aquatic ecosystems.

13
Objectives
• To promote and defend Australia’s international trade interests in aquatic animals
and their products, by 
- improving Australia’s international trade status as a responsible importer and
exporter of aquatic animals and products;
- increasing Australia’s international influence in establishing international and
regional standards and guidelines through providing technical and scientific
leadership.
Current Status
Australia will increasingly seek overseas market access for its aquatic animal
produce. To achieve this goal, we must be able to supply our trading partners with
information on the health status of our aquatic animal populations. Equally, we will
require equivalent information on potential imports.
Responsible reporting is a prerequisite to gain a trustworthy trade reputation. Some
of the reporting falls under Australia’s legal reporting obligations to OIE (World
Organisation for Animal Health). Australia wishes to remain an OIE member meeting
those requirements in a timely and professional manner. For other reporting
arrangements, such as regional reporting to the Network of Aquaculture Centres in
Asia-Pacific (NACA), there is no legal arrangement overriding our sovereignty.
However, a strongly supportive approach will be taken to promote and defend our
trade interests.
Since January 1998, Australia is participating in a five year FAO/NACA/OIE ‘Regional
Programme for the Development of Technical Guidelines on Quarantine and Health
Certification, and Establishment of Information Systems for the Responsible
Movement of Live Aquatic Animals in Asia’. There are over twenty Asia-Pacific
countries participating in this program. Establishment of regional technical
quarantine and health certification guidelines, initiation of regional aquatic animal
disease reporting on an agreed-upon list of aquatic animal diseases, and
commencement of an aquatic animal pathogen and quarantine information system
(via a database) are priorities for 1999. For 2000, the development of national
strategies to implement the regional technical guidelines into national regulations
Program 1

14
Australia continues to deliberate with OIE on re-considering aquatic animal disease
categorisation and notification schemes, inter alia to better represent the Southern hemisphere
and Asia-Pacific situation in particular, in the OIE International Aquatic Animal Health Code.
Key Issues
Project 1.1.  Regional Cooperation on Technical Standards
Components
1.1.1. Development of regional technical guidelines for aquatic animal quarantine and
health certification.
1.1.2. Agreement on important diseases for the Asia-Pacific region (for a list or reportable
diseases under NACA/OIE) and OIE endorsement.
1.1.3. Development of a data collection strategy for information on aquatic animal
pathogens (in Australia) and commencement of entering such data into the FAO/NACA
database ‘AAPQIS’ (Aquatic Animal Pathogen and Quarantine Information System).
Project 1.2.  OIE Disease Categorisation
Components
1.2.1. Establishment of a working group to further discussions with OIE on designing a
model to categorise aquatic animal diseases.
1.2.2. Re-assess the current aquatic animal disease lists of OIE, and communicate findings
to OIE.
Project 1.3. International Disease Reporting
Components
1.3.1. Fulfilling international obligations to OIE on notifiable diseases of aquatic animals.
1.3.2. Fulfilling international obligations to OIE on providing annual reports on our aquatic
animal health status.
1.3.3. Initiation of regional aquatic animal disease reporting to OIE/NACA on diseases
identified as ‘reportable’ on a regionally agreed-upon list of aquatic animal diseases.

15
Objectives
• To review all quarantine policies for aquatic animals and aquatic animal products
using a science based, consultative and transparent risk analysis process.
• To review and improve post-arrival quarantine procedures and operations.
• To meet documented international requirements relating to the export of aquatic
animals and aquatic animal products.
Current Status
The Australian Quarantine and Inspection Service (AQIS) will manage this
Quarantine program for which it has statutory and policy responsibilities. Internal
quarantine issues such as monitoring and surveillance, and inter-State movement of
aquatic animals, are dealt with primarily in other AQUAPLAN Programs (for
example, Program 3 and Program 7).
AQIS has completed an Import Risk Analysis Handbook, available at the website
address http://www.aqis.gov.au/docs/anpolicy/risk.pdf which explains Australia’s
international obligations and the relevant standards, and lays out in detail the
import risk analysis (IRA) process.
Several individual IRAs have commenced (prawns and prawn products; ornamental
fish; freshwater crayfish products; non-viable marine finfish products; non-viable
bivalve molluscs; non-viable salmonid products). For these non-routine IRAs,
scientific expertise is sought by AQIS outside of Agriculture, Fisheries and 
Forestry — Australia, to ensure that technical issues are fully addressed.
A training program for AQIS quarantine inspectors, which covers imported
ornamental fish inspections, identification and disease recognition is nearing
completion. This training program will provide inspectors with techniques and
software to improve the effectiveness of both their AQIS inspection duties and those
carried out on behalf of Environment Australia. AQIS is continuing to forge closer
links with Environment Australia, with AQIS officers to be appointed as inspectors
under the Wildlife Protection (Regulation of Exports and Imports) Act 1982.
Program 2

16
The criteria for quarantine approved premises for live fresh water fish have been
completed and comments received from industry. The implementation of these
criteria will occur when all comments have been incorporated into the final draft.
Once introduced, these arrangements will provide a greater degree of quarantine
control over the design and operation of these premises.
The Animal Health Science and Emergency Management Branch of the National
Office of Animal & Plant Health has been asked to complete an investigation of
random sampling methods for fish products, to ensure that pathogen-inactivating
treatments have been preformed effectively. The report is to be finalised in 1999.
AQIS officers will then receive training in random sampling techniques.
Export certification requirements are met in accordance with importing country
requirements. Domestic animal health surveillance and monitoring critically
underpin our export certification.
AQIS is presently developing commodity and non-commodity codes, which will
enable more efficient identification of aquatic animals, and other imports. These
codes will be used as the base for a reporting and query facility in the redeveloped
electronic import system. The codes will be developed using the Harmonised 
Tariff System.
Key Issues
Project 2.1.Import Risk Analysis for Imported Aquatic Animals 
and Aquatic Animal Products and Quarantine
Components
2.1.1. Individual risk analyses for the major imported aquatic animal products of risk.
2.1.2. Publication of Import Risk Analysis Handbook7.
Project 2.2. Quarantine
Components
2.2.1. Review and regulation of post-arrival quarantine procedures for live fish.
2.2.2. Training of Quarantine Officers in aquatic animal quarantine.
2.2.3. Random sampling of imported fish products.8
2.2.4.Dissemination of quarantine information on fish and fish products.

17
Project 2.3.  Quarantine Import Reporting
Components
2.3.1. Gather requirements from client areas such as Plant and Animal Programs, 
the International Policy Division and the Import Operations Section.
2.3.2. In-house classification of commodity/reporting codes.
2.3.3. Perform high level review of tariff profiles in COMPILE9.
2.3.4. Liase with industry/ Australian Customs Service (ACS) in regard to a tariff
expert further reviewing the work done so far, and suppling additional input.
2.3.5. Implementation of additional classifications and code infrastructure.
7  available on the internet, WebSite address: http://www.aqis.gov.au/docs/anpolicy/risk.pdf 
8  protocols for fish and fish products are available on the internet, 
WebSite address: http://www.aqis.gov.au/animal/index.htm
9  Customs Online Method of Producing from Invoice Lodgeable Entries

18
Objectives
• To consolidate information on and protect Australia’s aquatic animal health
status, by
• facilitating the detection and reporting of, and response to, aquatic animal
disease outbreaks;
• facilitating the enhancement of existing, and development of additional, national
and interstate disease control programs and zoning policies;
• supporting Australia’s international disease reporting obligations to OIE (World
Organisation for Animal Health);
• supporting regional disease reporting to the Network of Aquaculture Centres in
Asia and the Pacific (NACA).
Current Status
Several formally tabled reports10,11 have highlighted the need for an improved
response to monitoring and surveillance for aquatic animal health. A review of
existing surveillance and monitoring schemes, including those administered by the
private sector or research programs, is a high priority issue; only after such an
inventory has been consolidated, should recommendations be made for a future
concerted effort, especially in the light of limited resources.
Increasingly, Australia will be called upon (eg. by trading partners through the
World Trade Organisation — WTO processes) to substantiate its claims of freedom
from major diseases in order to support export certification and quarantine import
policy. As part of such assurances, we must be able to demonstrate that an adequate
level of services exist to detect, diagnose and control aquatic animal diseases. The
endorsement of a national list of reportable diseases of aquatic animals — as
opposed to existing, State/Territory lists which are inconsistent with each other —
is a high priority issue. Such a list in conjunction with a streamlined economic
10  Higgins, R. A. (chair) 1996: Report of the National Task Force on Imported Fish and Fish Products. 
Department of Primary Industries and Energy, Canberra. 269 pp – 
website: http://www.affa.gov.au/fisheries/imports/taskforce/index.html
11  Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture and Resource Management’s Task Force into Managing Incursions of
Aquatic Pests, Weeds and Diseases: 1997.
Program 3

19
reporting strategy also serves to fulfil reporting obligations to OIE and supports
regional reporting strategies.
At the domestic level, national surveillance and monitoring infrastructure will serve
to consolidate information on the distribution of pathogens, to facilitate the
development of zoning policies based on pathogen distribution, and to develop
disease management strategies to protect industry and the environment. It is
recognised that there would be some disadvantages to private industry sectors,
particularly where delineation of zones and barrier controls at zone borders may
compromise the freedom of movement between zones. However, such restrictions
are seen as necessary if we are to maintain disease-free areas and farms.
Key Issues
Project 3.1.  Surveillance and Monitoring for Aquatic 
Animal Diseases
Components
3.1.1. Assessment of the current status of surveillance and monitoring in
Australia.
3.1.2. Development and review of surveillance and monitoring strategies for
specific aquatic animal diseases in Australia.
3.1.3. Development of a system for surveillance and monitoring data
administration.
3.1.4. Development of standardised diagnostic and sampling techniques, and
standard operating procedures.
Project 3.2.
Reporting Arrangements
Components
3.2.1. Agreement on the national list of reportable diseases of aquatic animals, and
development of a review process for alterations to the list.
3.2.2. Development of a generic strategy for national aquatic animal disease
reporting and data administration system.
3.2.3. Adherence to international reporting objectives.
3.2.4. Implementation of emergency disease reporting strategy as required.

20
Project 3.3.
Zoning for Aquatic Animal Diseases
Component
3.3.1. Development of a policy paper on zoning, explaining the generic principles
of zoning based on pathogen distribution, the movement principles between zones,
and international relevance of national zoning.

21
Objectives
• To develop effective institutional arrangements to manage emergency aquatic
animal diseases in Australia.
• To develop a series of manuals and operational instruments which outline
methods and protocols to manage emergency aquatic disease outbreaks in
Australia (AQUAVETPLAN), based on the existing AUSVETPLAN arrangements.
Current Status
The development of effective institutional arrangements to manage disease
emergencies in the aquatic sector is of high priority. One of the major differences
to the well-developed arrangements in the terrestrial animal sector is the
involvement of two Ministerial portfolios (fisheries and agriculture); jurisdictional
rather than legislative issues need to be resolved as a matter of priority (see also
Program 7). States and Territories will have to develop their own arrangements to a
nationally agreed outcome.
The inclusion of aquatic animal disease emergency management within the
operating guidelines of the Consultative Committee on Emergency Animal Diseases
(CCEAD) has been accepted by CCEAD and is awaiting final endorsement by the
Standing Committee on Agriculture and Resource Management (SCARM). Whereas
on the terrestrial animal side responsibilities lie within the agricultural and
veterinary portfolios, the aquatic animal sectors require the additional inclusion of
fisheries and aquaculture portfolios. Therefore, in the case of aquatic animal disease
emergencies, the CCEAD will comprise the State/Territory Fisheries Managers next
to the State/Territory Chief Veterinary Officers. The Commonwealth Chief Veterinary
Officer will chair the CCEAD, and the Director of Aquaculture, Fisheries and
Aquaculture Branch (FAB), AFFA, will provide secretariat support.
Work on several components of the Aquatic Animal Diseases Veterinary Emergency
Plan (AQUAVETPLAN) is under way. Funding provided by the Fisheries Research and
Development Corporation (FRDC)12
assisted the development of a Control Centre
Manual and Enterprise Manual. Both these manuals are nearing completion.
Whereas some components such as Standard Operating Procedures will be largely
adopted from AUSVETPLAN, others will need to be developed specifically for
Program 4
12  FRDC Project (97/127): Generic Aquatic Animal Disease Contingency Planning Document.

22
aquatic animals. Given the limited resources available, prioritisation needs to be
performed in a strongly consultative manner, with private industry sectors leading
the process.
Key Issues
Project 4.1.
Consultative Committee on Emergency Animal 
Diseases (CCEAD)
Components
4.1.1. Formal inclusion of aquatic animal disease emergency management into the
CCEAD operating guidelines.
4.1.2. Ensuring State/Territory arrangements to comply with, and operate within,
the CCEAD structure.
4.1.3. Simulation exercise especially to test the communication flow.
Project 4.2.
AQUAVETPLAN
Components (adapted to the terrestrial animal AUSVETPLAN).
4.2.1. AQUAVETPLAN Summary Document.
4.2.2. Operational Procedures Manual.
4.2.3. Valuation and compensation.
4.2.4. Enterprise Manuals.
4.2.5. Disease Strategy Manuals for crustaceans, molluscs and fish.
4.2.6. Management Manuals.
4.2.7. Agency Support Plans.
4.2.8. Review and development of training resources.
4.2.9. Diagnostic resources.

23
Objectives
• To increase awareness of aquatic animal health issues, by
- providing education and training resources for all industry stakeholders and the
general public;
- encouraging the development of training and extension services in State and
Territory Fisheries Departments and within industry peak body associations;
- encouraging the development of aquatic animal health management practices
which decrease the reliance on drugs and chemicals ensuring their appropriate
and minimal use.
Current Status
Improved awareness about aquatic animal health and sources of assistance can be
achieved through raising the profile of these issues nationally. Awareness raising
must be a responsibility shared among Governments, educational institutions,
research providers and the private sector. Specific issues are, for example, the
disease risks associated with the use of prawns imported for human consumption,
as bait, or the disposal of diseased or dead aquarium fish into waterways.
Various groups in the public have to be targeted, by different campaigns and
technical means. As a matter of priority, simple and well-illustrated field guides
should be produced for recreational anglers, fishermen and aquaculturists.
Aquarium shop retailers should be targeted as a significant group for disseminating
information. Different material may be produced for the processing industry, for
example posters that are clearly visible from processing tables.
Aquaculture in Australia is expanding rapidly. There is a need for educational
institutions to place increased emphasis on training in aquatic animal health in
order to service the growing demand from this sector. Veterinary undergraduate as
well as specialist training in aquatic animal health should be provided as a matter
of priority. Supporting self-education may be a reasonable approach. Practising
veterinarians could be encouraged to diversify into aquatic animal health as an
‘add-on’ to their clinical spectrum.
Program 5

24
Extension services are usually provided by State and Territory Government agencies
and could be developed using existing fish health field officers, educational officers
and other liaison staff within fisheries departments. These services would provide
additional support and information on aquatic animal health to industry groups to
the mutual benefit of all involved.
Awareness about aquatic animal health issues in general and about AQUAPLAN as
a national strategy, needs to be raised. The involvement of primary producers,
technical experts, industry organisations and other stakeholders is essential to
ensure the effectiveness of AQUAPLAN initiatives.
Quality assurance relates directly to aquatic animal health management and is an
integral component of AQUAPLAN. The increasing consumer and market demand
for safe and wholesome food, and the changing regulations in food safety world
wide have lead to an increase in the importance of quality assurance, residue
monitoring and the safe, effective and minimal use of drugs and chemicals in
Australia’s seafood industries.
These issues are incorporated into AQUAPLAN through the development of
linkages into the following existing programs:
• the National Residue Survey chemical residue monitoring program;
• the Australian Shellfish Quality Assurance Advisory Committee;
• the Australian Shellfish Sanitation Control Program;
• Food Safety Emergency Management Mechanisms;
• the Australia-New Zealand Food Authority;
• gaining registration and minor use permit approval from the National
Registration Authority for the use of drugs and chemicals in Aquaculture10.
The issue of drug and chemical use in the seafood industry has been identified in
AQUAPLAN as a priority as it specifically links the management of aquatic animal
health with Quality Assurance. In addition to gaining approval for the use of drugs
and chemicals in aquaculture13, AQUAPLAN has identified the need for the
development of awareness programs and management practices which facilitate and
ensure the safe, effective and minimal use of drugs and chemicals in Australia’s
aquaculture and seafood industries.
13  FRDC Project (96/314) on the Registration of Drugs and Chemicals for Use in Aquaculture, coordinated by 
Dr. Steve Percival.

25
Key Issues
Project 5.1.
Public Awareness and Communication
Components
5.1.1. A Field Identification Guide for aquatic diseases.
5.1.2. Summary document providing information on the AQUAVETPLAN
emergency response and preparedness program.
5.1.3. Posters, pamphlets and videos for industry, veterinarians and the public.
5.1.4. Training for aquaculturists in aquatic animal health management and
improving farm practices to promote disease prevention.
5.1.5. Publication of regular columns in industry or trade journals.
5.1.6. A Disease Hotline for use by industry and the general public.
Project 5.2.
Education and Training
Components
5.2.1. Inclusion of aquatic animal health in veterinary curricula and other tertiary
education.
5.2.2. Supporting self-education.
5.2.3. Post graduate training of veterinarians, aquatic animal health specialists
and industry groups in recognition of disease syndromes.
Project 5.3.
Extension Services
Component
5.3.1. Support linkages of Governmental services with Fisheries Departments
liaison sections with industry.
Project 5.4.
Quality Assurance and Food Safety
Components
5.4.1. Registration and minor use permit approval for the use of drugs and
chemicals aquaculture.
5.4.2. Encourage the development of programs to promote the safe, effective and
minimal use of drugs and chemicals.

26
Objectives
• To identify research priorities in the field of aquatic animal health and aquatic
animal disease management.
• To promote research and development in these areas by industry and Government.
Current Status
Funding of $50,000 p.a. for four years has been allocated by the Government in
their response to several formally tabled reviews14,15, specifically for research into
replacement of imported aquatic animals and aquatic animal products as a means
of reducing the risk of importing exotic aquatic animal diseases.
Other priorities for research are the development of diagnostic techniques and
disease prevention methods including improved husbandry and management
practices. The Aquatic Animal Health Unit in the National Office of Animal and
Plant Health (NOAPH) in Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry — Australia will consult
with States and Territories and the private sector to prioritise diagnostic needs.
Besides these specific areas, the highest priority is given to producing an inventory
of current research in Australia. This inventory will be developed with the assistance
of key organisations such as the Fisheries Research and Development Corporation
(FRDC) and the Cooperative Research Centre for Aquaculture (Aquaculture CRC Ltd.).
The Standing Committee on Fisheries and Aquaculture (SCFA) recently released a
publication titled Research Priorities for Australian Fisheries and Aquaculture. 
The publication was prepared by the Research Committee of the SCFA and released
in 1998. It identifies those priority research areas required to underpin the
ecologically sustainable development of fisheries and aquaculture in Australia.
14  Nairn, M. E., Allen, P. G., Inglis, A. R. and Tanner C. 1996: Australian Quarantine: a shared responsibility. 
Department of Primary Industries and Energy, Canberra. 284pp – 
website: http://www.dpie.gov.au/dpie/committee/quarantine/report/quarrev.html
15  Higgins, R. A. (chair) 1996: Report of the National Task Force on Imported Fish and Fish Products.
Department of Primary Industries and Energy, Canberra. 269 pp – 
website: http://www.dpie.gov.au/resources.energy/fisheries/taskforce/index.html
Program 6

27
Courtesy of Dr A Hyatt, CSIRO Australian
Animal Health Laboratory
A second priority is to develop a strategic plan to prioritise genuine research needs
in the area of health management. A number of industry sectors have already
developed such plans, but a collaborative approach between research providers and
the beneficiaries at a national level is important to ensure research priorities are
addressed with a minimum of duplication. Priorities will include industry-focussed
issues as well as public good priorities. The above Government funds may assist in
developing a comprehensive database of research activities and diagnostic
capabilities in Australia.
Key Issues
Project 6.1.
Strategic Plan for Focussed and 
Prioritised Research
Components
6.1.1. Inventory of aquatic animal health research in Australia.
6.1.2. Prioritisation of research needs by industries and Governments.
6.1.3. Development of a strategic research plan.
Project 6.2.
Specific Research Needs
Components
6.2.1. Prioritisation of research into import replacements.
6.2.2. Aquatic disease management (to prevent disease).
6.2.3. Development of new diagnostic tests.

28
Objectives
• To facilitate the implementation of surveillance and control strategies, and
preparedness and response arrangements for aquatic animal diseases at the State
and Territory level.
• To ensure that legislative and jurisdictional mechanisms are in place to effectively
manage aquatic animal health in Australia.
• To establish National Policy Guidelines on the Translocation of Aquatic Organisms
within Australia which provide means to better manage the risks associated with
the introduction of aquatic pests and translocation of aquatic animals.
Current Status
Existing State and Territory legislation dealing with aquatic animals has recently
been reviewed16. The review concluded that legislation already exists in all States 
and Territories to enable the implementation of aquatic animal health management
plans and emergency response arrangements. Specific gaps exist and will need to 
be addressed by States and Territories individually; these largely relate to
jurisdictional issues.
AQUAPLAN will not attempt to ‘harmonise’ legislation; rather it will assist the
adoption of agreed legislative outcomes and operate under agreed principles of
health management. One of the principles will be to allow sufficient incorporation
of private sector needs into individual planning in each State and Territory.
The National Policy Guidelines on the Translocation of Live Aquatic Organisms
(Translocation Guidelines) were recently endorsed by the Ministerial Council on
Forestry, Fisheries and Aquaculture. The major purpose of the Translocation
Guidelines is to outline standard procedures for the responsible movement of live
aquatic organisms within Australia. They will also support the development of a
national zoning policy for aquatic disease management and control (see Program
3). The principles outlined in the Translocation Guidelines should be incorporated
into industry codes of practice.
16  Crane, M. S. & G. T. Rawlin (1997): Aquatic Animal Disease Preparedness Assessment. Final Report. FRDC Project Number 95/087. 138pp.
Program 7

29
Key Issues
Project 7.1.
Legislation, Policies and Jurisdiction
Component
7.1.1. Identify and work towards necessary legislative and jurisdictional outcomes.
7.1.2. Encourage the States and Territories to critically assess their existing systems
regarding gaps, legal challenges, and extent of enforcement.
7.1.3. Encourage States and Territories to adopt the generic principles and adjust
their systems accordingly, to ensure agreed-upon outcomes.
7.1.4. Legislation for normal activity (surveillance) as opposed to disease outbreaks.
7.1.5. Provide SCARM/SCFA with recommendations to improve reporting and
management of aquatic animal disease outbreaks.
Project 7.2.
Translocation
Component
7.2.1. Agree on a national approach to translocation of aquatic animals through
SCFA and its subcommittees AC and FEHC.
7.2.2. Agree on a national approach to policy for the post quarantine management
of imported fish and aquatic products.
7.2.3. Implement the necessary changes to legislative arrangements, policies and
regulations at the State / Territory government level.

30
Objectives
• To develop a cost-sharing arrangement between industry and Government which
underpins the funding of emergency response mechanisms;
• To assess the resources required to support the implementation of projects
necessary to maintain high standards of aquatic animal health management 
in Australia.
Current Status
Initial funding for AQUAPLAN has been provided by the Commonwealth for a period
of five years and is subject to continued review and delivery of agreed milestones.
Terrestrial farming industries are currently looking at levy arrangements to meet
their ongoing contributions to the Australian Animal Health Council (AAHC) and
their Strategic Priorities Plan for Animal Health in Australia 1998–2003. However,
there are no levy arrangements in place that could be activated to support payments
from the aquatic industries. Capture fisheries and recreational fisheries as well as
aquaculture industries would have to be involved in a funding strategy.
Discussions on resources and funding for aquatic animal health management are
currently underway. Both government and private sectors are involved in discussions
addressing a wide range of issues, including the roles and responsibilities of
government and private sectors, the role of insurance providers compensating for
loss and institutional arrangements for raising revenue to pay for emergency
preparedness and response mechanisms.
For terrestrial animals, the costs of eradication and compensation for the
destruction of stock to control any one of twelve listed exotic animal diseases is
currently met through the Cost Sharing Agreement between the States/Territories
and Commonwealth. In the case of an outbreak of any other disease of some
significance in a particular State/Territory, that State/Territory would meet those
costs. Terrestrial animal disease compensation arrangements are under revision,
principally to consider the ‘beneficiary pays’ principle. The area of cost sharing for
aquatic animal health management is more difficult to address, given the species —
Program 8

31
and thus disease — diversity of the industry and the distinctly regionalised
distribution pattern reflecting specific temperature zones.
Not all States and Territories include aquatic animals in their definition of animals
as livestock. This is an extremely important point in terms of funding arrangements,
since the inclusion of aquatic animals in the definition of animals as livestock
would allow existing (terrestrial) animal disease control arrangements to apply to
aquatic animals.
The Fisheries and Aquaculture Branch (FAB) in cooperation with the private industry
sector is currently preparing a detailed options paper on resources and funding 
for AQUAPLAN.
Key Issues
Project 8.1.
On-Going Funding Arrangements for AQUAPLAN
Component
8.1.1. Examine the Australian Animal Health Council funding structures for the
terrestrial animal industries as a potential model to be applied to the aquatic animal
industries.
Project 8.2.
Funding to Underpin Aquatic Animal Disease 
Emergency Response Arrangements 
(AQUAVETPLAN)
Project 8.3.
Continuing Funding to Support Disease 
Monitoring and Surveillance and 
Reporting Activities
Project 8.4.
Continuing Funding to Support Development 
of Awareness and Promotion for Aquatic 
Animal Diseases
Components
8.4.1. Encouraging the development of undergraduate and postgraduate veterinary
and aquatic animal health training.
8.4.2. Codes of Practice in aquatic animal health management.

32
8.4.3. Increased general public awareness of aquatic animal health issues, especially
through the aquarium and recreational fishing industries.
Project 8.5.  
Evaluate the Potential for Insurance Companies 
and Underwriters to provide Compensation 
Coverage
Components
8.5.1. Presentation of information by an aquaculture industry insurance expert.
8.5.2. Separately address the issues of compensation versus major loss due 
to disease.

33
Acronym
Full Spelling
AAF
Australian Aquaculture Forum
AAHC
Australian Animal Health Council Ltd.
AAPQIS
Aquatic Animal Pathogen and Quarantine Information System
AC
Aquaculture Committee (of SCFA)
ACS
Australian Customs Service
AFFA
(Department of) Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry — Australia
AQIS
Australian Quarantine and Inspection Service
AQUAVETPLAN
Aquatic Animal Veterinary Emergency Plan
ARMCANZ
Agriculture and Resource Management Council of Australia and New Zealand
ASIC
Australian Seafood Industry Council
CCEAD
Consultative Committee on Emergency Animal Diseases 
COMPILE
Customs Online Method of Producing from Invoice Lodgeable Entries
CRC
Cooperative Research Centre for Aquaculture (Aquaculture CRC Ltd.)
CSIRO
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation
CVO
Chief Veterinary Officer
EHC
Environment and Health Committee (of SCFA)
FAB
Fisheries and Aquaculture Branch (AFFA)
FAO
Food and Agricultural Organisation
FHMC
Fish Health Management Committee
FRDC
Fisheries Research and Development Corporation
IRA
Import Risk Analysis
MCFFA
Ministerial Council on Forestry, Fisheries and Aquaculture
NACA
Network of Aquaculture Centres in Asia-Pacific
NOAPH
National Office of Animal and Plant Health
NRA
National Registration Authority
OIE
Office International des Epizooties (World Organisation for Animal Health)
SCARM
Standing Committee on Agriculture and Resource Management
SCFA
Standing Committee on Fisheries and Aquaculture
WTO
World Trade Organization

34
The production of this document was coordinated by the National Office of Animal & Plant
Health within Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry — Australia.
For further information regarding AQUAPLAN please contact:
Aquatic Animal Health Unit
National Office of Animal and Plant Health
Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry — Australia
GPO Box 858
Canberra, ACT 2601
Phone: 02 6272 4328

For further information:
Aquatic Animal Health Unit
National Office of Animal and Plant Health
Agriculture, Fisheries & Forestry — Australia
GPO Box 858, Canberra, ACT 2611
Phone 02 6272 4328
AQUAPLAN can be downloaded from the web
www.affa.gov.au/ocvo/fhu/aquaplan.html
ANUGRAPHICS