AQUAPLAN
Developments in national aquatic animal health management in Australia 1997-2002
a five-year review

AQUAPLAN outlines Australia’s national strategic plan for aquatic animal
health. It was jointly developed by the Commonwealth and State and
Territory governments and private industry sectors. The production of
AQUAPLAN was coordinated by the Office of the Chief Veterinary Officer
on behalf of the Fish Health Management Committee.  
This review of work conducted under AQUAPLAN during the period 1997-
2002 was prepared by the Secretariat of the Fish Health Management
Committee.
© Commonwealth of Australia 2002
ISBN 0-642-50269-2
material in unaltered form only (retaining this notice) for non-commercial
rights are reserved. Requests and inquiries concerning reproduction and
rights should be addressed to the Manager, Legislative Services, AusInfo, GPO
This material is general in nature. It is made available on the understanding
that the Commonwealth is not thereby engaged in rendering professional
advice. In some cases the material may incorporate or summarise views,
standards or recommendations of third parties. Such material is assembled in
good faith, but does not necessarily reflect the considered views of the
Commonwealth, or indicate a commitment to a particular course of action.
Links to other web sites are inserted for convenience and do not constitute
endorsement of material at those sites, or any associated organisation,
product or service.
For further information regarding AQUAPLAN please contact:
Aquatic Animal Health
Office of the Chief Veterinary Officer
Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry – Australia
GPO Box 858
Canberra, ACT 2601
Phone: 02 6272 4328

1
Table of Contents
Executive Summary .................................................................................................................................................................................................2
Introduction ..............................................................................................................................................................................................................................4
Background.................................................................................................................................................................................................................................5
The Past Four Years..................................................................................................................................................................................................6
FHMC Meetings ..........................................................................................................................................................................................................7
FHMC Members...........................................................................................................................................................................................................8
Interim consultative body....................................................................................................................................................................9
Permanent consultative body......................................................................................................................................................9
Outlook............................................................................................................................................................................................................................................10
Acknowledgements..............................................................................................................................................................................................12
Acronyms and Abbreviations........................................................................................................................................................13
Appendix 1 – Achievements of AQUAPLAN...............................................................................................14
Program 1 – International Linkages .........................................................................................................................14
Program 2 – Quarantine.....................................................................................................................................................................18
Program 3 – Surveillance, Monitoring and Reporting......................................................21
Program 4 – Preparedness and Response......................................................................................................26
Program 5 – Awareness .......................................................................................................................................................................30
Program 6 – Research and Development......................................................................................................33
Program 7 – Legislation, Policies and Jurisdiction....................................................................35
Program 8 – Resources and Funding ...................................................................................................................38

2
Executive Summary
Australia's fisheries and aquaculture are of increasing
economic importance in Australia. Their capacity to
contribute through export earnings and job creation
especially in regional Australia is a vital part of our
future prosperity. The gross value of aquaculture
production (A$750 million in 2000-01) now exceeds
30% of the total value of fisheries, with major
contributing sectors being pearl farming, tuna cage
culture, salmon culture, edible oysters and prawn
culture1.
Recognising the critical importance of aquatic
animal health for overall profitability, sustainability,
competitive trade advantages and public health, the
Commonwealth Government in 1997 established the
Fish Health Management Committee (FHMC) with
the mandate to develop a comprehensive aquatic
animal health plan for Australia and to address
management procedures for aquatic animal disease
emergencies. In 1999, the then Ministerial Council
on Forestry, Fisheries and Aquaculture (MCFFA)
endorsed the resulting national strategic plan for
aquatic animal health — AQUAPLAN — which had
been developed jointly by a wide range of fishing
industry sectors and the Commonwealth and State
and Territory governments. 
For the past five years, members of FHMC and their
supporting agencies and industries have
implemented a wide range of priority AQUAPLAN
projects. Projects completed over the last years
include the production and publication of the
Australian Aquatic Animal Diseases Field
Identification Guide; conducting disease simulation
exercises for governments and industries; production
of manuals for AQUAVETPLAN (Australia’s Aquatic
Animal Disease Veterinary Emergency Plan);
preparation of several key import risk analyses;
publication of AQUAPLAN Disease Zoning Policy
Guidelines; review of current surveillance and
monitoring programs for aquatic animal diseases and
subsequent drafting of a business/operational plan
for an aquatic animal health information system;
writing of Australian Standard Diagnostic Techniques
for prioritised diseases and Standard Operating
Procedures; establishment of a chapter for aquatic
animal health with the Australian College of
Veterinary Scientists; and provision of training in
aquatic animal health management to tertiary
students (veterinary medicine and aquaculture). 
FHMC was established as an interim body until
permanent arrangements for the national
management of aquatic animal health could be
established. Over the past two years, an extensive
1 ABARE 2002, Australian Fisheries Statistics 2001, Canberra.

process of review and stakeholder consultation led to
the formal suggestion to establish the Aquatic
Animal Health Committee (AAHC) to replace FHMC.
Australia’s Primary Industries Standing Committee
(PISC) in September 2002 endorsed the
establishment of the AAHC as the primary
industry/government interface – responsible to the
Primary Industries Health Committee and
through it to PISC – for policy,
communication and awareness
related to aquatic animal health
issues. 
Australia is the world’s first
country to have a national, joint
industry/government strategy for
aquatic animal health (AQUAPLAN).
Establishing AAHC as the body to oversee its
refinement, update and continuing implementation
as well as guide the future management of aquatic
animal health is the logical next step to ensure:
• Integration of the States’ and Territories’ aquatic
animal health responsibilities with the
Commonwealth Government’s role of maintaining
quarantine, meeting international requirements
for disease reporting, developing trade
relationships and negotiating market access; 
• Avoidance of duplication between States, and
addressing cross-border issues consistently; 
• Provision of an avenue for input by the private
sector; and
• Utilisation of expertise that may only be available
in aggregate. 
Despite the considerable progress made under
AQUAPLAN to date, several major challenges still lay
ahead. Examples include:
• Biological challenges, e.g. identifying and
addressing potential and emerging health issues
especially in ‘new’ aquaculture species in a pro-
active manner;
• Policy challenges, e.g. developing cost-sharing
arrangements for the management of aquatic
animal health in Australia.
- For the first 2.5 years, AAHC core funding will
be derived from government sources (50%
Commonwealth; 50% States and the Northern
Territory in aggregate), however, this core
funding will not provide for actual projects,
and AAHC will need to respond to identified
resource requirements of national aquatic
animal health policies and programs. It is
crucial for the effective and sustainable
management of aquatic animal health jointly
by governments and industry that a true tri-
partite funding arrangement be developed by
AAHC as a key priority, to enable industry
contributions after 30 June 2005.
- AAHC will need to address the development of
a cost-sharing arrangement for management
of emergency aquatic animal disease incidents. 
- Because of its full State and Territory
representation, AAHC is also ideally placed to
progress the many cross-jurisdictional issues,
e.g. the implementation of zoning and
translocation guidelines in each jurisdiction;
coordination of surveillance and monitoring;
and coordination of consistent policy and
legislation across jurisdictions.
• Diagnostic challenges: Continuously updating and
improving Australia’s capability and capacity to
rapidly and effectively identify aquatic animal
diseases;
• Trade challenges: Effectively influencing the
setting of international aquatic animal health
standards through providing sound scientific
advice.
In summary, AAHC will take a lead role in developing
and reviewing national aquatic animal health
policies and programs, and provide
advice and submit
recommendations to PISC and
other stakeholders on those
issues. A first formal review
of AAHC is to take place
before 30 June 2004.
3

Introduction
Australia's fisheries and aquaculture are of increasing
economic importance in Australia. Their capacity to
contribute through export earnings and job creation
especially in regional Australia is a vital part of our
future prosperity. Aquaculture in particular continues
to grow, in volume, earnings, and in the relative
share in all fisheries production. The gross value of
aquaculture production in Australia rose by 146%
over the last decade, compared with a rise of 46%
for the total value of fisheries production. The gross
value of aquaculture production (A$750 million in
2000-01) now exceeds 30% of the total value of
fisheries, with major contributing sectors being pearl
farming, tuna cage culture, salmon culture, edible
oysters and prawn culture2. 
Diseases have the capability to seriously impede
profitability and sustainability of aquaculture
production; next to direct loss of stock through
death and morbidity, the costs associated with
attempts to control or mitigate an outbreak may
render a business commercially unviable.
Furthermore, overseas experience has shown that
some aquatic animal diseases can lead
to catastrophes of socio-economic
dimension, causing dramatic
economic losses not only to an
individual enterprise but to a
national economy3. 
Australia is fortunate to be
free from many diseases that
occur elsewhere in the world,
and this provides us with a
comparative advantage in both
production as well as in trade. Australia's capacity to
produce "clean green" seafood of superior quality
allows ready access to overseas markets, enhances
competitiveness and also provides value adding
through the capacity to attract premium prices. 
It is vital for Australia to maintain this relative
disease free status. Industry and government have
recognised the importance of an integrated and
planned approach on aquatic animal health. This
lead to the cooperation between industry and
government in developing AQUAPLAN, Australia's
five year National Strategic Plan for Aquatic Animal
Health. AQUAPLAN is a comprehensive document
describing initiatives ranging from border controls
and import certification through to enhanced
veterinary education and improved capacity to
manage incursions of exotic diseases, the latter
coordinated under AQUAVETPLAN, Australia’s Aquatic
Animal Diseases Veterinary Emergency Plan. The
eight programs described in this plan represent a
world first in proactive management of aquatic
animal health. 
In 1997, the Commonwealth Government established
the Fish Health Management Committee (FHMC)
with the mandate to develop a comprehensive
aquatic animal health plan for Australia and to
address management procedures for aquatic animal
disease emergencies. In 1999, the then Ministerial
Council on Forestry, Fisheries and Aquaculture
(MCFFA) endorsed the resulting national strategic
plan for aquatic animal health — AQUAPLAN —
which had been developed jointly by a wide range of
fishing industry sectors and the Commonwealth and
State and Territory governments.
FHMC was established as an interim body until
permanent arrangements for the national
management of aquatic animal health could be
established. Over the past two years, an extensive
process of review and stakeholder consultation has
led to the formal suggestion to establish the Aquatic
Animal Health Committee (AAHC) to replace FHMC
and in the future act as the primary industry-
government interface for policy, communication and
awareness related to aquatic animal health issues.
For the past five years, members of FHMC and their
supporting agencies and industries have
implemented a wide range of priority AQUAPLAN
projects. The progression from FHMC to AAHC
provides a timely opportunity to reflect on past
4
2 ABARE 2002, Australian Fisheries Statistics 2001, Canberra.
3 Examples include the white spot disease epidemics in farmed shrimp in Asia and South America and infectious salmon anaemia in farmed Atlantic salmon in northern Europe and North
America.

achievements and present a comprehensive report on
the progress achieved to date under AQUAPLAN.
Background
In the wake of the 1995 pilchard mortality in
southern Australian waters, the then Standing
Committee on Fisheries and Aquaculture (SCFA)
reported to MCFFA in November 1995 that priority
should be given to developing a national response
mechanism for fisheries and aquaculture
emergencies. Subsequently, several comprehensive
reviews were formally tabled within Australia; these
critically assessed, and made recommendations for,
Australia’s national response to fisheries and
aquaculture emergencies4, Australia’s quarantine
including aquatic animal quarantine5,6, imported fish
and fish products7, and management of incursions of
pests, weeds and diseases8.
commitment towards aquatic animal health issues to
ensure the effective and sustainable development and
profitability of Australia’s aquatic animal industries.
In this context, the prevention and management of
diseases are of paramount importance. In 1997,
following a Cabinet decision relating to the ‘Nairn’
and the ‘Higgins’ reports (see footnotes), the Federal
Government allotted $6.7 million dollars over four
years to the then Commonwealth Department of
Primary Industries and Energy, now Department of
Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry - Australia (AFFA)
to implement the recommendations of both reports.
Of the total sum, $2.7m were allocated to develop a
comprehensive aquatic animal health plan for
Australia, and to address management procedures for
aquatic animal disease emergencies. The
Commonwealth Government’s response to the ‘Nairn’
and the ‘Higgins’ reports recognised that
“there should be a national approach [to fish
health] jointly developed by the Commonwealth,
states and industry that includes quarantine,
research and education and public awareness as key
components”. 
The response further noted that 
“… it is also important to ensure that our priorities
are correct and that the burden of resources is
shared equitably among the beneficiaries”. 
Specifically, the response accepted Higgins Report
Recommendation No. 36: 
“That consideration be given to the establishment 
of an Aquatic Animal Health Management Sub-
committee or, more appropriately, a Task Force
reporting to SCFA and FEHC, with terms of reference
to include development and implementation of a
ten-to-fifteen-year strategic plan for research and
diagnostic services for the aquatic animal health
sector” 9. 
To achieve this goal, the then Commonwealth
Minister for Primary Industries and Energy appointed
FHMC as a joint industry-government committee. It
was established as an interim body pending a
decision on long-term administrative and funding
arrangements. Under the oversight of FHMC, industries
and governments developed a detailed framework
for the management of aquatic animal health in
Australia: AQUAPLAN – Australia’s National Strategic
Plan for Aquatic Animal Health 1998-2003. Between
1998 and 1999, stakeholders from governments and
the private sector signed on to AQUAPLAN which
was finally endorsed by Ministers in 1999.
In the May 2000 Budget, the Federal Government
announced its Building a National Approach to
Animal and Plant Health program. Within this
initiative, approximately $3m over four years were 
5
4 Jones, R. 1995: Managing the National Response to Fisheries and Aquaculture Emergencies.
5 Nairn, M. E., Allen, P. G., Inglis, A. R. and Tanner C. 1996: Australian Quarantine: a shared responsibility. Department of Primary Industries and Energy, Canberra. 284pp.
6 Nunn, M. J. 1995: Aquatic Animal Quarantine in Australia: Report of the Scientific Working Party on Aquatic Animal Quarantine. Bureau of Resource Sciences, Canberra. 45pp.
7 Higgins, R. A. (chair) 1996: Report of the National Task Force on Imported Fish and Fish Products. Department of Primary Industries and Energy, Canberra. 269 pp.
8 Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture and Resource Management’s Task Force into Managing Incursions of Aquatic Pests, Weeds and Diseases: 1997.
9 Anderson, J. 1997: Australian Quarantine: a shared responsibility – The Government response. Department of Primary Industries and Energy, Canberra. 67pp.

made available as administered funds10 to
Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry – Australia (AFFA)
to support aquatic animal health in four specific
program areas, i.e. Diagnostics, Emergency
Management Planning, Emergency Management
Training and Incident Simulation, and the
[Establishment of a] Joint industry/ government
body for aquatic animal health management. 
In addition, in the 2001 Budget, the Commonwealth
Government provided departmental funds to AFFA to
extend that Department’s commitment to aquatic
animal health for at least another four years. 
The Past Four Years
AQUAPLAN is a broad, comprehensive strategy that
outlines objectives and projects to develop a national
approach to emergency preparedness and response
and to the overall management of aquatic animal
health in Australia. An electronic copy of AQUAPLAN
is available at http://www.affa.gov.au.11
The plan lays out eight key programs under which
industry and government have identified priority
projects, namely:
1. International Linkages;
2. Quarantine;
3. Surveillance, Monitoring and Reporting;
4. Preparedness and Response;
5. Awareness;
6. Research and Development (R&D);
7. Legislation, Policies and Jurisdiction; and
8. Resources and Funding.
The programs are directed to maximise Australia’s
ability to control aquatic animal disease outbreaks,
maintain market access, support quality assurance
and improve the productivity and sustainability of
Australia’s aquatic animal production industries.
Between 1998 and 2001, FHMC convened four
annual AQUAPLAN Stakeholder Workshops to review
progress made on AQUAPLAN projects and determine
priorities for the upcoming year. These priorities were
translated into annual AQUAPLAN work plans which
were subsequently endorsed by FHMC’s parent
Standing Committee (see ‘Interim Consultative Body’
below for details).
Many stakeholders contribute to the implementation
of such priority projects: the Commonwealth
Government with its various groups within AFFA (the
Office of the Chief Veterinary Officer (OCVO) which
also provided the secretariat since late 1998); the
Australian Quarantine and Inspection Service (AQIS)
and Biosecurity Australia which together oversee
Program 2; and the Fisheries and Aquaculture Branch
who oversaw the first steps towards the
development of AQUAPLAN), State and Territory
governments; educational institutions; the
commercial fishing (including aquaculture) and
recreational fishing sectors, as well as the wider
public — for example, through increased disease
vigilance by the angling community.
Projects completed over the last years include the
production and publication of the Australian
Aquatic Animal Diseases Field Identification Guide;
conducting disease simulation exercises for
governments and industries; production of manuals
for AQUAVETPLAN (Australia’s Aquatic Animal
Disease Veterinary Emergency Plan); publication of
AQUAPLAN Disease Zoning Policy Guidelines; review
of current surveillance and monitoring programs for
aquatic animal diseases and subsequent drafting of a
business/operational plan for an aquatic animal
health information system; writing of Australian
Standard Diagnostic Techniques for prioritised
diseases and Standard Operating Procedures;
establishment of a chapter for aquatic animal health
with the Australian College of Veterinary Scientists;
and provision of training in aquatic animal health
management to tertiary students (veterinary
medicine, aquaculture). 
6
10 As per an Agreement between AFFA and the Fisheries Research and Development Corporation (FRDC), these monies are administered by the FRDC on AFFA’s behalf. The FRDC’s vehicle
for delivery is the FRDC Aquatic Animal Health Subprogram.
11 Click on Output ‘Product Integrity/Animal and Plant Health’ on the left side, then go to ‘All Product Integrity / Animal and Plant Health Documents’ and click on ‘AQUAPLAN’.

The work of AQIS and Biosecurity Australia over the
last four years in managing pest and disease risks
associated with importation of aquatic animal
commodities has included several key import risk
analyses, defence of a World Trade Organization (WTO)
challenge of Australia’s salmon import restrictions
and on-going policy and operational activities, in
addition to significant contributions to various
AQUAPLAN initiatives coordinated by the OCVO. 
A full description of the achievements under
AQUAPLAN is detailed in Appendix 1.
FHMC Meetings
Since its inauguration in 1997, FHMC has held 14
meetings and hosted four AQUAPLAN Stakeholder
Workshops. Details of these meetings are provided in
Table 1. Meetings were supported with OCVO and
State government funds.
7
Meeting #
Location 
Date
1
Teleconference
12 December 1997
First AQUAPLAN Workshop
Canberra
27-28 April 1998
2
Canberra
29 April 1998
3
Canberra
16 December 1998
Second AQUAPLAN Workshop
Canberra
15-16 June 1999
4
Canberra
16 June 1999
5
Teleconference
13 September 1999
6
Teleconference
2 December 1999
7
Teleconference
10 March 2000
Third AQUAPLAN Workshop
Canberra
10-11 May 2000
8
Canberra
11 May 2000
9
Teleconference
2 August 2000
10
Teleconference
25 October 2000
11
Adelaide
28-29 March 2001
Fourth AQUAPLAN Workshop
Brisbane
13-14 August 2001
12
Brisbane
15-16 August 2001
13
Brisbane
29-30 November 2001
14
Adelaide
24 July 2002
Table 1: Fish Health Management Committee meetings and AQUAPLAN
Stakeholder Workshops

FHMC Members
FHMC was established in 1997 as committee of ten
members representing governments and industry. In
2000, membership was expanded to include
representatives of additional industry sectors. Lately,
FHMC comprised 14 representatives from the
Commonwealth, State and Territory governments;
the peak aquaculture industry bodies of Australia;
the Australian Seafood Industry Council (ASIC);
recreational fisheries (RecFish Australia); and CSIRO
Livestock Industries12. The Australian Chief Veterinary
Officer chaired FHMC. Staff within the OCVO
provided the secretariat. 
There was no specific budget for the FHMC; the costs
of committee members’ and secretariat staff members’
services were not recovered, and the effectiveness of
8
Surname
First name
Representing
Member since
Member until
Bennison
Simon
National Aquaculture Council
2001
2002 
Beumer
John
Standing Committee on 
2001
2001
Fisheries and Aquaculture
Breen
Martin
Australian Prawn Farmers 
2000
2002
Association
Buckley
Mick
Pearl Producers Association
2000
2000
Crane
Mark
CSIRO Animal Health
2001
2002 
Gillespie 
Jim
Aquaculture Committee
2001
2002
(observer)
Horwood
Angus
RecFish Australia
1998
2001
Hurry
Glenn
AFFA
1998
2002 
Jeffriess
Brian
Australian Seafood Industry 
1998
2002 
Council
Jungalwalla
Pheroze
Tasmanian Salmonid Growers
2000
2002
Association
McCallum
Brett
Pearl Producers Association
2001
2002 
Murray (chair)
Gardner
AFFA
1998
2002 
Neal 
Russ
Australian Seafood Industry 
2001
2002
(observer)
Council
Patrick
Jared
Pet Industry Joint Advisory 
2000
2002 
Council
Pike
Graham
RecFish Australia
2001
2002 
Pollock
John
Standing Committee on 
1998
2002
Agriculture and Resource 
Management
Pyne
Rex
Standing Committee on 
2000
2001
Fisheries and Aquaculture
Rickard
Mike
CSIRO Animal Health
1998
2000
Schaap
Alex
Standing Committee on 
1998
1999
Fisheries and Aquaculture
Scoones
Rick
National Aquaculture Council
1998
2000
Tynan
Ray
Oyster Research Advisory 
2000
2002
Committee
Table 2: Fish Health Management Committee members (listed by name)
12 Previously CSIRO Animal Health.

the Committee had to a large extent rely on the
commitment and goodwill of its members. The
members, their affiliation and the term that they
served on FHMC are presented in Table 2.
Interim consultative body
During the period of 1998-2002, FHMC worked on
the development, awareness and implementation of
AQUAPLAN13. The committee has provided advice on
strategic issues related to implementation of
AQUAPLAN14, with operational aspects of emergency
management response being outside its role. It was
instrumental in setting up the FRDC Aquatic Animal
Health Subprogram, which it advised on investment
of Federal Budget Initiative Building a National
Approach to Animal and Plant Health program funds
through its AQUAPLAN Business Group which serves
as the Subprogram’s Steering Committee.
When initially set up, FHMC reported in parallel to
SCARM and SCFA. When this proved impracticable in
1999, SCFA became the sole parent body. Following
the re-organisation of Ministerial Councils and the
underlying committee structures in 2001, FHMC now
reports to the Primary Industries Standing
Committee (PISC). 
Permanent consultative body
FHMC was established as an interim body, and
throughout its existence has worked towards the
establishment of a permanent consultative body for
aquatic animal health. Reflecting a widely
acknowledged priority, AQUAPLAN itself does indeed
recognise a need for
‘examination of the Australian Animal Health
Council funding structures for the terrestrial animal
industries as a potential model to be applied to the
aquatic animal industries’ 15.
Accordingly a review was instigated in 2000 to
explore options for a permanent management
mechanism for aquatic animal health. Relevant to
the timing of the review was the availability of funds
under the Federal Budget Initiative Building a
National Approach to Animal and Plant Health
program from mid 2000 to mid 2002, and the need
to complete work on the Higgins Report
Recommendation No. 36:
‘that appropriate resources be made available by the
Commonwealth, states and industry to enable
implementation of the recommendations of this
report within five years’ 16 (i.e., by the end of 2002).
As part of the review, a survey of key stakeholders as
well as key stakeholder meetings were conducted to
determine the best structure for such a body. There
was no support for the immediate establishment of a
stand-alone national aquatic animal health body
along the lines of Animal Health Australia (AHA) and
Plant Health Australia, not-for profit public
companies established by governments and livestock
industries and plant industries, respectively. Rather it
was preferred that the consultative committee be
serviced by a low-cost secretariat operating under
the aegis of an existing organisation such as the
FRDC or AHA.
Back-to-back with the August 2001 AQUAPLAN
Stakeholder Workshop, government and industry
stakeholders then considered the preferred options
for a coordinating body. Virtually all stakeholders:
• did not want to create a new independent
umbrella body, and 
• agreed to set up a working group to review FHMC
and provide recommendations for its future role,
activities, structure and funding. 
9
13 Activities have focused mainly on the aquaculture sector, reflecting the fact that non-farmed aquatic animals are less amenable to management actions because they grow in the wild.
Nevertheless, some parts of the commercial wild-catch and recreational sectors are affected by aquatic animal health factors.
14 Activities have included development of emergency outbreak management arrangements for the wild-catch and aquaculture sectors and, in particular, activities relating to
jurisdictional responsibilities, scientific expertise and resources (e.g. researchers, diagnostic capacity), monitoring and surveillance, contingency planning and response activities, exploring
funding arrangements (including compensation and cost-sharing) and raising community awareness.
15 AQUAPLAN Program 8 — Resources and Funding. Project number 8.1.1. 
16 Anderson, J. 1997: Australian Quarantine: a shared responsibility – The Government response. Department of Primary Industries and Energy, Canberra. 67pp.

A Working Group established by FHMC in August
2001 suggested the reconstitution of FHMC as a new
body, the Aquatic Animal Health Committee (AAHC),
with new Terms of Reference and a dedicated
funding basis. In November 2001, FHMC concurred
with the Working Group’s report that the new AAHC
should report to PISC. FHMC at their November 2001
meeting also discussed the draft business/operational
plan for a new Australian Aquatic Animal Health
Information System (AAAHIS). FHMC agreed that a
2-page summary document on suggested Terms of
Reference for the new AAHC, its membership, modus
operandi, and funding arrangements, needed to be
widely circulated to stakeholders, accompanied by an
AAHC draft business plan, by the FHMC Working
Group Report, and by the revised AAAHIS
Business/Operational Plan. Accordingly, FHMC
secretariat undertook an extensive stakeholder
consultation campaign – supported with Federal
Budget Initiative Building a National Approach to
Animal and Plant Health funds - between February
2002 and July 2002.
FHMC had its final meeting on 24 July 2002 in
Adelaide (FHMC-14) as the last step in this AAHC
stakeholder consultation process. FHMC endorsed the
AAHC draft Business Plan (April 2002) with the
following modifications: 
(a) Allow for full State and Territory jurisdictional
representation on AAHC; 
(b) Establish AAAHIS as per AAAHIS Operational
Plan; FHMC reconfirmed the establishment of
AAAHIS as part of AAHC as a high priority, and
industry representatives reaffirmed their
commitment to financially contribute to AAAHIS. 
(c) Modify the role of AAHC and its executive
secretariat to reflect the now suggested full State
and Territory jurisdictional representation; 
(d) Change the AAHC budget to reflect that only
industry members’ travel costs to meetings will be
covered whilst government members are expected to
cover their own travel costs; and
(e) Use the moving 3-year-average of total fisheries
production (including aquaculture) as the basis to
determine the States’ and the Northern Territory’s
contributions to AAHC and AAAHIS.
In August 2002, the formal suggestion was made to
PISC to
‘endorse the establishment of the AAHC as the
primary industry/government interface – responsible
to Primary Industries Health Committee (PIHC) and
through it to Standing Committee – for policy,
communication and awareness related to aquatic
animal health issues.’
PISC discussed the suggested national consultative
arrangements for aquatic animal health in session at
their 5 September 2002 meeting (meeting Number 3;
Agenda item 3.11) and endorsed the establishment of
the AAHC as the primary industry/government
interface – responsible to PIHC and through it to
PISC – for policy, communication and awareness
related to aquatic animal health issues. PISC also
endorsed the AAHC draft Business Plan and that
AAHC be initially chaired by the AFFA representative
on PIHC. 
PISC furthermore requested that AAHC (rather than
PISC) give consideration to the establishment of the
AAAHIS and future funding arrangements, and
report back to PISC in March 2003.
Outlook
Australia is the world’s first country to have a
national, joint industry/government strategy for
aquatic animal health (AQUAPLAN). Establishing the
body to oversee its refinement, update and
continuing implementation as well as guide the
future management of aquatic animal health is the
logical next step to ensure:
• Integration of the States’ and Territories’ aquatic
animal health responsibilities with the
Commonwealth Government’s role of maintaining 
10

quarantine, meeting international requirements
for disease reporting, developing trade
relationships and negotiating market access; 
• Avoidance of duplication between States, and
addressing cross-border issues consistently; 
• Provision of an avenue for input by the private
sector; and
• Utilisation of expertise that may only be available
in aggregate. 
The establishment of AAHC under PIHC ensures that
expert advice is available to PIHC, Standing
Committee and Ministerial Council on aquatic animal
health matters, and that aquatic animal health has
an unambiguous and dedicated place in the
committee structure underpinning Ministerial
Council. AAHC is also ideally placed to establish and
maintain close linkages to Veterinary Committee on
veterinary matters. AAHC’s scope is clearly
differentiated in the AAHC draft Business Plan from
the scope of the Consultative Committee on
Emergency Animal Diseases (CCEAD).
The presence of fisheries and aquaculture expertise
on AAHC (through government and industry
members) will ensure an expanded framework for
policy and strategic discussions with organisations
that have responsibility for fisheries management
(including those operating within the Natural
Resources Management Standing Committee and its
Ministerial Council framework). 
Despite the considerable progress made under
AQUAPLAN to date, several major challenges still lay
ahead. Areas and examples include:
• Biological challenges: Identifying and addressing
potential and emerging health issues especially in
‘new’ aquaculture species;
• Policy challenges: Developing cost-sharing
arrangements for the management of aquatic
animal health in Australia;
• Diagnostic challenges: Continuously updating and
improving Australia’s capability and capacity to
rapidly and effectively identify aquatic animal
diseases;
• Trade challenges: Effectively influencing the
setting of international aquatic animal health
standards with sound scientific advice.
Industry has repeatedly identified several issues that
need to be addressed and resolved. These issues
include compensation for loss due to compulsory
slaughter of stock and the development of a cost-
sharing arrangement for management of emergency
disease incidents. In addition, governments have
identified the need for industries to contribute
financially to aquatic animal health management as
a key component of a final management
arrangement. 
During the stakeholder workshop conducted in
August 2001, participants completed a gap analysis
to identify areas of aquatic animal health that
needed addressing. The identified issues included (in
no particular order):
• Implementation of zoning and translocation
guidelines in each jurisdiction
• Coordination and funding of additional
surveillance and monitoring
• Coordination of state based monitoring databases
• Establishment of an authority to advise on the
most appropriate diagnostic techniques
• Addressing the shortage of diagnostic capacity
within Australia
• Prioritising the AQUAVETPLAN manuals that need
to be produced
• Ensuring that State/Territories work within the
CCEAD structure
• Addressing the lack of extension and
communication about AQUAPLAN projects
• Coordinated development of training materials
• Coordination of consistent policy and legislation
across jurisdictions
• Development of a framework to determine
funding and compensation for compulsory
slaughter and crop loss.
11

Some of these areas have been addressed in the past
twelve months. In particular, the prioritisation of
AQUAVETPLAN manuals has been completed and
funding has been obtained to design and conduct a
training course for CCEAD members. The formal and
sustainable establishment of the National Fish
Pathologists’ Workshop as a working group under
AAHC will provide a technical forum that can
address issues such as appropriate diagnostic
techniques, and this group has already established a
sub-committee to consider action to address the
shortage of diagnostic capacity in Australia. 
Priority issues identified in the gap analysis (see
above) will have to be subjected to a risk analysis in
order to develop a sound operational plan. On this
basis, the new AAHC will have to:
• Identify emerging aquatic animal health issues
and make recommendations for policy
development and management;
• Take a lead role in developing and reviewing
national aquatic animal health policies and
programs;
• Actively respond to identified resource
requirements of national aquatic
animal health policies and
programs;
• Provide advice and submit
recommendations to PISC
and other stakeholders
on those issues; and
• Report on strategic issues and submit
recommendations relating to AQUAPLAN and its
implementation to PISC and other stakeholders;
and
• Review communication and extension strategies
on aquatic animal health issues and facilitate
implementation of those strategies.
As stipulated in the AAHC draft Business Plan, a
formal review of AAHC is to take place before 30
June 2004.
Acknowledgements
The generous provision of strategic input by all
FHMC members over the last five years is greatly
acknowledged. 
Australia’s aquatic animal health experts from
governments, academia, and the private sector are
most gratefully thanked for their continuous and
untiring provision of expert advice on a wide array
of scientific and technical matters. Without
their support, FHMC could have
not operated effectively and
authoritatively.
12

Acronyms and Abbreviations
AAAHIS
Australian Aquatic Animal Health Information System 
AAHC
Aquatic Animal Health Committee 
AAHL
CSIRO Australian Animal Health Laboratory
AAPQIS
Aquatic Animal Pathogen and Quarantine Information System
ACIAR
Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research
ACS
Australian Customs Service
AFFA
AHA
Animal Health Australia
AQIS
Australian Quarantine and Inspection Service
ASIC
Australian Seafood Industry Council
CCEAD
Consultative Committee on Emergency Animal Diseases
COMPILE
Customs Online Method of Producing from Invoice Lodgeable Entries
CPA
Crop Protection Approvals
CSIRO
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization
FEHC
Fisheries Environment and Health Committee (of the then SCFA)
FHMC
Fish Health Management Committee
FRAB
Fisheries Research Advisory Body
FRDC
Fisheries Research and Development Corporation
IRA
Import risk analysis
MCFFA
Ministerial Council on Forestry, Fisheries and Aquaculture
NACA
Network of Aquaculture Centres in Asia-Pacific
NC
National Coordinator
OCVO
Office of the Chief Veterinary Officer
OIE
Office International des Epizooties
PIHC
Primary Industries Health Committee
PIJAC
Pet Industry Joint Advisory Council
PISC
Primary Industries Standing Committee
QUADs
Quadrilateral Group of Countries (Australia, New Zealand, United States, Canada)
RWG
Regional Working Group
SCARM
Standing Committee on Agriculture and Resource Management
SCFA
Standing Committee on Fisheries and Aquaculture
SDT
Standard Diagnostic Technique
SOP
Standard Operating Procedure
TCP
Technical Cooperation Programme
VHS
Viral haemorrhagic septicaemia
WSV
White spot virus
WTO
World Trade Organization
13

Appendix 1 – Achievements
of AQUAPLAN 
AQUAPLAN is comprised of eight programs, each is
considered separately, and the achievements are
compared to the initial objectives.
Program 1 – International Linkages
Objectives
• To promote and defend Australia’s international
trade interests in aquatic animals and their
products, by 
- improving Australia’s international trade
status as a responsible importer and exporter
of aquatic animals and products;
- increasing Australia’s international influence
in establishing international and regional
standards and guidelines through providing
technical and scientific leadership.
Project 1.1.1. Development of regional technical
guidelines for aquatic animal quarantine and
health certification
A Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) Technical
Cooperation Programme (TCP) Project Assistance for
the Responsible Movement of Live Aquatic Animals
was launched by the Network of Aquaculture
Centres in Asia-Pacific (NACA) in 1998, with the
participation of 21 countries from throughout the
region. It was driven by a Regional Working Group
(RWG) and assisted by Technical Support Services
and involved input from government-designated
National Coordinators (NCs), NACA, FAO, the Office
International des Épizooties (OIE – World
Organisation for Animal Health), and regional and
international specialists. Staff from the OCVO
provided both a RWG member as well as the
Australian NC, and additional OCVO as well
Biosecurity Australia officers participated extensively 
throughout the two-year lifespan of the program.
The resulting ‘Regional Technical Guidelines’ were
endorsed by 21 Asian countries at a workshop held
in Beijing in June 2000, and were published in
December 2000 by the FAO, with subsequent
publication of two accompanying documents, also
developed with considerable input by Australian
experts: 
Publications – all available from the NACA website under
http://www.enaca.org/publications.htm#NewPublications:
• Regional Technical Guidelines published in
December 2000: FAO 2000 Asia Regional
Technical Guidelines on Health Management for
the Responsible Movement of Live Aquatic
Animals and The Beijing Consensus and
Implementation Strategy. FAO Fisheries Technical
Paper 402, 53pp.
• Manual of Procedures published in 2001: FAO
2000 Manual of Procedures for the
implementation of the Asia Regional Technical
Guidelines on Health Management for the
Responsible Movement of Live Aquatic Animals.
FAO Fisheries Technical Paper 402/1, 106pp.
• Asia Diagnostic Guide published in December
2001: FAO 2001 Asia Diagnostic Guide to Aquatic
Animal Diseases. FAO Fisheries Technical Paper
402/2, 237pp.
Follow-on activities:
Since 2001, implementation of the guidelines is
facilitated by NACA who in turn are assisted by the
Asia Regional Advisory Group on Aquatic Animal
Health (established in November 2001). An OCVO
staff member was appointed Vice-Chair of this group
for the first three years.
Project 1.1.2. Agreement on important diseases in
the Asia-Pacific region (for a list of reportable
diseases under NACA/OIE) and OIE endorsement
As part of the FAO TCP Project Assistance for the
Responsible Movement of Live Aquatic Animals
implemented by NACA, a workshop was held in 
14

January 1998 in Bangkok, Thailand, jointly with the
OIE. As an RWG member, an OCVO officer attended
this workshop where a list of diseases to be included
in a NACA/OIE Quarterly Aquatic Animal Disease
Reporting System was drafted. The draft list was
endorsed by NCs, NACA and the OIE. Reporting began
with the third quarter (July-September) of 1998. 
Follow-on activities:
Since mid 1998, the OCVO collates
information from the Australian
States and Territories on all
diseases listed for the NACA/OIE
Quarterly Aquatic Animal
Disease Reporting System,
prepares quarterly consolidated
reports (with information by
month), and submits them to the
OIE Regional Office on Tokyo and
to NACA (see Project 1.3.3. below).
Project 1.1.3. Development of a data collection
strategy for information on aquatic animal
pathogens (in Australia) and commencement of
entering such data into the FAO/NACA database
‘AAPQIS’ (Aquatic Animal Pathogen and Quarantine
Information System)
Between 1998 and 2000, an OCVO officer fulfilled
the role of NC for the FAO TCP Project Assistance for
the Responsible Movement of Live Aquatic Animals
implemented by NACA. The OCVO therefore accepted
the responsibility of reviewing the published
scientific literature for articles reporting new aquatic
animal pathogens from within Australia. In late
1998, the OCVO submitted a list of pathogens to
AAPQIS that were extracted from all literature
published between 1994 and 1998. 
Follow-on activities:
Since late 1998, the OCVO prepares and submits to
NACA quarterly updates on the published scientific
literature for articles reporting new aquatic animal
pathogens from within Australia. 
Project 1.2.1. Establishment of a working group to
further discussions with OIE on designing a model
to categorise aquatic animal diseases
Between 1999 and 2000, an OCVO officer chaired a
working group established by, and reporting to, the
Quadrilateral Group of Countries (Australia,
New Zealand, United States, Canada) –
the QUADs. Whilst the working group
was initially tasked to assist the OIE
in developing a new model for
listing and categorising aquatic
animal diseases, members quickly
realised that there were wider issues
surrounding these discrete problems.
The working group – renamed as the
QUADs Working Group on Aquatic
Animal Disease Concepts – developed an
issues paper on aquatic animal disease
categorisation and notification which was endorsed
by the QUADS in early 2000 and formally submitted
to the OIE Fish Diseases Commission for
consideration. 
Follow-on activities:
The OIE’s Fish Diseases Commission has taken the
QUADs issues paper into account for their on-going
deliberations with OIE Member Countries and the
OIE International Animal Health Code Commission
(terrestrial animals) on the development of disease
listing and notification arrangements consistent for
terrestrial and aquatic animals. 
Project 1.2.2. Re-assess the current aquatic animal
disease lists of OIE, and communicate findings to OIE
Australia influences OIE disease listings through a
formal process, commencing with the collation of
stakeholder comments from within Australia on the
changes suggested by the OIE, and the subsequent
consolidation of those comments into one national 
15

response by OCVO staff. The response is then
formally submitted to the OIE through Australia’s
national delegate to the OIE, Dr Gardner Murray. 
Whilst some changes were suggested – and
subsequently made – by the OIE over the last years,
the OCVO has requested that OIE withhold any
additions to, or deletions from, the lists until the
new disease listing and notification arrangements
are finalised (see Project 1.2.1. above).
Project 1.3.1. Fulfilling obligations to OIE on
notifiable diseases of aquatic animals
Throughout the lifespan of AQUAPLAN, there was
only one event where an exotic virus – white spot
virus (WSV) – which is notifiable to the OIE was
suspected in Australia (but fortunately confirmed
only in imported prawns). The OCVO informed the
OIE of the suspicion, and regular briefings were
provided as long as the animal health investigations
continued, in particular, on the subsequent survey of
Australian crustaceans which confirmed Australia’s
status of freedom from WSV. The suspect presence of
the disease agent was clearly distinguished in these
reports from clinical disease – there was no evidence
of the latter at any time.
Project 1.3.2. Fulfilling international obligations to
the OIE on providing annual reports on our aquatic
animal health status
Annual reports on Australia’s aquatic animal health
status are prepared each year by the OCVO and are
submitted to the OIE as part of Australia’s
consolidated animal health report (see also projects
3.2.2. and 3.2.3. below). 
Project 1.3.3. Initiation of regional aquatic animal
disease reporting to OIE/NACA on diseases
identified as ‘reportable’ on a regionally agreed-
upon list of aquatic animal diseases
As part of the FAO TCP Project Assistance for the
Responsible Movement of Live Aquatic Animals
implemented by NACA, a workshop was held in
January 1998 in Bangkok, Thailand, jointly with the
OIE. A list of diseases to be included in a NACA/OIE
Quarterly Aquatic Animal Disease Reporting System
was drafted (see Project 1.1.2. above).
Since mid 1998, the OCVO collates information from
the Australian States and Territories on all diseases
listed for the NACA/OIE Quarterly Aquatic Animal
Disease Reporting System, prepares quarterly
consolidated reports (with information by month),
and submits them to the OIE Regional Office on
Tokyo and to NACA. The reports can be viewed on
the website of the office of the OIE Regional
Representation for Asia and the Pacific
(http://www.rr-asia.oie.int/).
Follow-on activities:
This is an on-going activity which has become a core
duty of the OCVO; it relies on the continuous and
timely input of accurate data by States and
Territories.
The following projects were added at Annual
AQUAPLAN Stakeholder Workshops:
Project 1.1.4. Assessment of benefits from NACA
membership from an aquatic animal health point
of view in order to contribute to the general
review of benefits from NACA membership
The OCVO has provided substantial input into the
review, conducted by AFFA’s Fisheries and
Aquaculture branch, of NACA membership. The
review identifies substantial benefits and
recommends that membership of NACA be on-going.
16

It also recommended that Australia further develops
its engagement and interaction with the NACA
organisation to increase the benefits flowing to
Australia.
Follow-on activities:
AFFA is seeking permanent funding for Australia's
NACA membership through the current budgetary
process based on the outcomes of the review.
Project 1.3.4. Availability of Australia’s Quarterly
Reports to OIE/NACA on the AFFA Website under
Aquatic Animal Health
Australia’s Quarterly Reports to OIE/NACA are
available on the NACA
(http://www.enaca.org/Health/Quarterly/) and OIE
websites (http://www.rr-asia.oie.int/).
Follow-on activities:
The OCVO will continue to ensure that Australia’s
Quarterly Aquatic Animal Disease Reports are
available on the AFFA website or through the
OIE/NACA websites. 
Project 1.3.5. Consideration to transfer OIE/NACA
combined Quarterly Reports from 20 countries to
AFFA Website under Aquatic Animal Health for
availability within Australia
A hot-link to the website of the Office of the OIE
Regional Representation for Asia and the Pacific
(http://www.rr-asia.oie.int/) has been included on the
AFFA website under Aquatic Animal Health, to
provide direct access to Quarterly Aquatic Animal
Disease reports from other countries in the region.
The reports are also available at the NACA website
which has also been hot-linked
((http://www.enaca.org/Health/Quarterly/).
Follow-on activities:
The OCVO will ensure that hotlinks remain current. 
Project 1.4.1. Effective influence on OIE
deliberations
Since 2000, the OCVO provides a member on the
OIE’s Fish Diseases Commission
(http://www.oie.int/fdc/eng/en_fdc.htm), enabling
scientific and technical input into OIE deliberations. 
As discrete, completed activities, Australia has
directly influenced the OIE through chairing the
QUADs Working Group on Aquatic Animal Disease
Concepts (see Project 1.2.1. above), and through
providing experts to write the chapters on Spawner-
isolated mortality virus disease for the OIE
International Aquatic Animal Health Code
(http://www.oie.int/eng/normes/fcode/A_summry.htm)
and the Diagnostic Manual for Aquatic Animal Diseases
(http://www.oie.int/eng/normes/fmanual/A_summry.htm\).
The OCVO circulates the meeting reports of the
biannual meetings of the OIE Fish Diseases Commission
to a broad range of Australian experts; these reports
contain the drafts for comment of new chapters for
the Code, and the OCVO coordinates the Australian
response to these documents. In addition, and
following the same process, Australia provides detailed
comments on draft revisions to chapters in the Manual.
Australia has also successfully applied to modify the
OIE International Database for Aquatic Animal
Diseases (http://www.collabcen.net/) to more
accurately reflect Australia’s disease status.
Summary
• All projects within Program 1 are either
completed or are on-going activities that are
delivered through the coordination of the OCVO
in close cooperation with State and Territory
governments and aquatic animal health experts.
The objectives of Program 1 have been met, and
continue to be met, through these activities. In
particular, Australia’s international influence in
establishing international and regional standards
and guidelines through providing technical and
scientific leadership has increased significantly,
and Australian input is actively sought by
international and regional organisations.
17

Program 2 – Quarantine
Objectives
• To review all quarantine policies for aquatic
animals and aquatic animal products using a
science based, consultative and transparent risk
analysis process.
• To review and improve post-arrival quarantine
procedures and operations.
• To meet documented international requirements
relating to the export of aquatic animals and
aquatic animal products.
Note: Commonwealth Government responsibility for
quarantine (or biosecurity) issues relating to aquatic
animals lies with the Australian Quarantine and
Inspection Service (AQIS) and Biosecurity Australia,
and Forestry (AFFA). Their duties are broadly
categorised into import and export related work.
Biosecurity Australia undertakes policy reviews
(including the coordination of import risk analyses)
and makes recommendations on import policy to the
AQIS. AQIS is responsible for the implementation of
biosecurity policies under the Quarantine Act.
Project 2.1.1. Individual risk analyses for the major
imported aquatic animal products of risk
From 1995-1999, Biosecurity Australia and the AQIS
played a key role in Australia’s defence in the World
Trade Organization (WTO) of the Canadian challenge
of salmonid product on importation restrictions,
including preparing technical arguments and
facilitating various domestic stakeholder input to the
process. Associated with this WTO case, Biosecurity
Australia completed import risk analyses (IRAs) for
salmon product, marine finfish product and live
ornamental finfish, based on which, new biosecurity
policies were announced and implemented by AQIS.
IRAs on non-viable animals/products of prawns,
bivalve molluscs, freshwater crayfish and freshwater
finfish are currently under way. The latter two, 
although still being progressed, have been accorded
lower priority in the context of managing the
group’s resources. 
The non-viable prawn and prawn products draft IRA
is being revised, and interim biosecurity conditions
have been implemented pending finalisation of the
IRA. 
The IRA on non-viable bivalve molluscs first initiated
in 1998, but slowed due to other commitments, was
recommenced mid-2001. A technical issues paper,
including identification of potential hazards, was
released in September 2002. 
Technical issues papers have also been released for
the freshwater crayfish and freshwater finfish
product import risk analyses. The next step in each
IRA will be the release of draft import risk analysis
reports for public comment in 2003.
Following the discovery of viral haemorrhagic
septicaemia (VHS) virus in pilchards and mackerel,
interim biosecurity restrictions were introduced in
May 2002. Biosecurity Australia is conducting a
detailed policy review of VHS virus risks associated
with product intended for direct introduction into
natural waters. 
A major auxiliary project is a consultancy on
recreational fishing bait and berley use that will
provide much needed information on bait-use
patterns, particularly with respect to imported
product. The survey results will be available in late
2002 and will feed into current and future IRAs. 
Project 2.1.2. Publication of Import Risk Analysis
Process Handbook
The Import Risk Analysis Process Handbook was
published in 1998 and is available on the AFFA
website (http://www.affa.gov.au). 
Follow-on activities:
A revised version of the handbook has been prepared
and has been circulated to stakeholders for
comment.
18

Project 2.2.1. Review and
regulation of post-arrival
quarantine procedures for
live fish.
The project has been completed and new
health certification and post-arrival quarantine
detention requirements have been in place since
early 2000. 
Follow-on activities:
Full implementation of testing requirements is on-
track.
Project 2.2.2. Training of Quarantine Officers in
aquatic animal quarantine
Training workshops on post-arrival quarantine
procedures have been conducted for quarantine
officers, and manuals detailing the procedures have
been produced. Work Instructions on fish import
clearance have been completed and distributed.
Project 2.2.3. Random sampling of imported fish
products
A Technical Report on the random sampling of
imported fish products has been finalised.
Follow-on activities:
The report will be used for specific programs
developed through the IRA process as required.
Project 2.2.4. Dissemination of quarantine
information on fish and fish products
All draft documents for comment, and finalised
protocols are made available on the AFFA website
(http://www.affa.gov.au/animalbiosecurity) as part of
the formal risk communication process. 
A stakeholder register has been created and is used
to disseminate quarantine information and gather
stakeholder input. When warranted, public meetings
are held to obtain stakeholder feedback on proposed
changes to quarantine practices.
Project 2.3.1. Gather requirements from client
areas such as Plant and Animal Programs, the
International Policy Division and the Import
Operations Section.
Relevant groups within AQIS have been consulted,
and their input has been utilised in developing
classification of commodity codes for improved
quarantine import reporting.
Project 2.3.2. In-house classification of
commodity/reporting codes
A new classification system is being developed as
part of the AQIS Import Management System.
Incident reporting software is also being developed
to assess changing risks associated with commodity
and countries. AQIS is working with the
Australian Customs Service (ACS) to ensure
quarantine integrity is maintained when
COMPILE (Customs Online Method of
Producing from Invoice Lodgeable
Entries) is upgraded through the Cargo
Management and Re-engineering project.
Project 2.3.3. Perform high level review of tariff
profiles in COMPILE (Customs Online Method of
Producing from Invoice Lodgeable Entries)
This project has been completed and the information
included as a component of Project 2.3.5. (see
below).
19

Project 2.3.4. Liase with industry/ Australian
Customs Service (ACS) in regard to a tariff expert
further reviewing the work done so far, and
suppling additional input
A tariff expert and the Evaluation Unit of the ACS
have reviewed and reported on classification of
commodity/reporting codes. The resulting
information was utilised to assist development of the
new classification system described under Project
2.3.2. above.
Project 2.3.5. Implementation of additional
classifications and code infrastructure
Additional codes have been developed to enable
differentiation between green prawns, cooked
prawns, wild-caught and farmed prawns. A specific
code was developed to identify freshwater crayfish.
The following projects were added at Annual
AQUAPLAN Stakeholder Workshops:
Project 2.4.1. Raising public awareness on aquatic
animal quarantine issues, and promoting AQIS’s
role in protecting aquatic animal health
A major awareness campaign on the safe use and
handling of aquatic animals and their products is
being developed by Biosecurity
Australia in consultation with
industry groups and
State/Territory
agencies. The
program will target
a wide range of
groups including
recreational 
fishermen, commercial fishermen,
food service industry, consumers and
boaters. The bait and berley survey
currently being conducted among
recreational fishers is also being used as a tool to
identify target groups for the awareness campaign.
Project 2.4.2. Development of Codes of Practice
and use as an interim measure to maintain post-
border integrity
A discussion paper recommending a practical way to
develop Codes of Practice / Progressive Risk
Management Strategies was circulated to industry
organisations in June 2000. The covering note
invited groups to seek comment or advice from AQIS
on the development of the Codes. No responses were
received. 
Follow-on activities:
Further activity in this area will be part of the
awareness campaign developed under Project 2.4.1.
Summary
• All projects within Program 2 are either
completed or are on-going activities that are
delivered through AQIS and Biosecurity
Australia. The objectives of Program 2 have
been met, and continue to be met, through
these activities. New import risk analyses or
policy reviews will be conducted as the need
arises.
20

Program 3 – Surveillance, Monitoring and
Reporting
Objectives
• To consolidate information on and protect
Australia’s aquatic animal health status, by:
- facilitating the detection and reporting of,
and response to, aquatic animal disease
outbreaks;
- facilitating the enhancement of existing, and
development of additional, national and
interstate disease control programs and
zoning policies;
- supporting Australia’s international disease
reporting obligations to OIE (World
Organisation for Animal Health);
- supporting regional disease reporting to the
Network of Aquaculture Centres in Asia and
the Pacific (NACA).
Project 3.1.1. Assessment of the current status of
surveillance and monitoring in Australia
A report produced within AFFA on the Current
arrangements for monitoring, surveillance and
reporting of aquatic animal health in Australia was
tabled at the Fish Health Management Committee
(FHMC) meeting in May 2000. Subsequently, a
consultant was retained to review the report and
recommend a way forward for developing
monitoring and surveillance for aquatic animal
disease in Australia. The consultant’s report was
endorsed by FHMC at their meeting in October 2000.
Follow-on activities:
The consultant retained to recommend a way
forward for surveillance and monitoring in Australia
subsequently developed a Business/Operational plan
to establish the Australian Aquatic Animal Health
Information System (AAAHIS) – see below Project
3.1.3.
Project 3.1.2. Development and review of
surveillance and monitoring strategies for specific
aquatic animal diseases in Australia
A National Survey to confirm the absence of white
spot virus (WSV) from Australia was co-funded by
the OCVO and Biosecurity Australia during 2001.
Funding has been provided through the Fisheries
Research and Development Corporation (FRDC) for
development of a zoning strategy to control the
disease marteiliosis in Sydney rock oysters. The
primary objective of this project is to provide a
scientifically-based zoning policy to prevent the
spread of this pathogen between production areas
and facilitate domestic and international market
access for the industry. To achieve this, the
researchers will – through sampling and appropriate
diagnosis – identify marteiliosis-free and
marteiliosis-endemic estuaries within oyster culture
areas; determine the specific identity of Marteilia sp.
from positive samples; develop a rational and
effective program of surveillance for marteiliosis;
and, in consultation with fisheries managers and
industry, develop a coastal zoning plan for
marteiliosis. The project commenced in February
2002 and is scheduled to be completed in February
2005.
Future surveillance and monitoring strategies for
specific aquatic animal diseases will substantially
benefit from the establishment of AAAHIS (see
Project 3.1.3.).
Project 3.1.3. Development of a system for
surveillance and monitoring data administration
The consultant retained to recommend a way
forward for surveillance and monitoring in Australia
(see Project 3.1.1.) subsequently developed a
Business/Operational plan to establish the Australian
Aquatic Animal Health Information System (AAAHIS);
this plan was endorsed by FHMC in November 2001.
On advice from industry stakeholders, the
21

Business/Operational Plan for AAAHIS was
incorporated into the new business plan for the
proposed Aquatic Animal Health Committee (AAHC). 
Follow-on activities:
At their September 2002 meeting, the Primary
Industries Standing Committee (PISC) resolved that
AAHC give further consideration to the
establishment of the AAAHIS and report back to PISC
in March 2003. 
Project 3.1.4. Development of standardised
diagnostic and sampling techniques, and standard
operating procedures
Standard Diagnostic Techniques (SDTs) for five
diseases (finfish: spring viraemia of carp, yersiniosis;
molluscs: bonamiosis, haplosporidiosis; crustaceans:
crayfish plague) and Standard Operating Procedures
(SOPs) for Virus Isolation and Collection, and for
Submission of Finfish Samples, have been authored,
peer-reviewed, and are available on the AFFA
website (http://www.affa.gov.au)17. SDTs for
infectious salmon anaemia and white spot disease of
crustaceans as well as an SOP for Design and
Implementation of Health Testing Protocols are
available in draft form and will be published on the
website when peer review is complete.
The Federal Budget Initiative Building a National
Approach to Animal and Plant Health has provided
funding for development/improvement of diagnostic
techniques for an additional seven diseases (finfish:
aquatic birnavirus infection, piscirickettsiosis,
nodavirus infection; epizootic ulcerative syndrome;
crustaceans: crayfish plague, spawner mortality
disease; molluscs: marteiliosis). An output of each
project is an SDT which, when complete, will be
published on the AFFA website. 
Follow-on activities:
Publication of all aquatic animal SDTs and SOPs on
CD ROM will occur in the near future, and
publication in hard copy is being negotiated with
Veterinary Committee’s Sub Committee Animal
Health Laboratory Standards.
Project 3.2.1. Agreement on the national list of
reportable diseases of aquatic animals, and
development of a review process for alterations to
the list
In 1998, Australian States and Territories through the
then Standing Committees on Agriculture and
Resource Management (SCARM) and on Fisheries and
Aquaculture (SCFA) endorsed the concept, the
purpose, as well as a then current version, of a
National List of Reportable Diseases of Aquatic
Animals (‘the National List’). It was also agreed that
the National List would be reviewed under the
oversight of the FHMC, that FHMC would ensure
input of scientific expertise, that FHMC-endorsed
proposals for alterations would be submitted to
Standing Committee(s) for approval, and that FHMC
would ensure that appropriate industry experts
(reflecting the aquaculture sector(s) affected) as well
as State/Territory fish experts (reflecting the
States/Territories affected) would be consulted
and/or represented in these deliberations. 
Since its inception in 1998, the National List was
modified once, using the above process, commencing
with State and Territory aquatic animal health
specialists and then moving on through FHMC and
Veterinary Committee to PISC who endorsed the
changes in March 2002. Participants at the National
Fish Pathologists’ Workshops in 2001 and 2002
endorsed the mechanism that was used to change
the National List.
Follow-on activities:
The consultation/endorsement process for a second
set of changes was commenced in October 2002, and
it is expected that changes will become necessary
annually, as a result of changes made by the OIE to
their aquatic animal disease lists.
22
17 Click on ‘Product Integrity, Animal and Plant Health’ in the OUTPUTS box on the left hand side of the AFFA home-page, then under ‘All Product Integrity / Animal and Plant Health
Documents’, click on the folder ‘AQUAPLAN’. In ‘Overview of the AQUAPLAN Documents’, click folder ‘Standard Diagnostic Techniques’.

Project 3.2.2. Development of a generic strategy
for national aquatic animal disease reporting and
data administration system
In 1998, Australian States and Territories through the
then SCARM and SCFA endorsed the concept, the
purpose, as well as a then current version, of a
National List of Reportable Diseases of Aquatic
Animals (‘the National List’). It was also agreed that
disease reporting would consist of State coordinators
collecting monthly information on the status of the
listed diseases and report to the OCVO on a quarterly
basis, using the regular OIE symbols for disease
reports. The OCVO would collate the information into
a central database and provide a full set of data (i.e.
all data from all States and Territories) to all States
and Territories on a quarterly basis – these data are
confidential. The OCVO would also produce
amalgamated, national reports – which are not
confidential – for use in international reporting (see
Projects 1.3.1.– 1.3.3. above).
Recently, a restricted-access e-mail notification
system has been established by the same network for
the sole purpose of rapidly and confidentially sharing
relevant aquatic animal disease information outside
of the regular quarterly cycle. 
Follow-on activities:
Quarterly disease reporting by States and Territories
commenced in the third quarter of 1998 and has
continued since. Data are accumulated and stored on
a database located within the OCVO. 
Project 3.2.3. Adherence to international reporting
objectives
Since mid 1998, the OCVO has collated information
from the Australian States and Territories on all
diseases listed for the NACA/OIE Quarterly Aquatic
Animal Disease Reporting System, has prepared
quarterly consolidated reports (with information by
month), and has submitted them to the OIE Regional
Office on Tokyo and to NACA. The reports can be
viewed on the website of the Office of the OIE
Regional Representation for Asia and the Pacific
(http://www.rr-asia.oie.int/) – see also Project 1.3.3.
Using the same data, the OCVO prepares annual
reports on Australia’s aquatic animal health status
and submits them to the OIE as part of Australia’s
consolidated animal health report (see also Project
1.3.2.).
Follow-on activities:
This is an on-going activity which has become a core
duty of the OCVO; it relies on the continuous and
timely input of accurate data by States and
Territories.
Project 3.2.4. Implementation of emergency
disease reporting strategy as required
Since the implementation of AQUAPLAN, disease
incidents requiring implementation of the emergency
disease reporting strategy have not occurred within
Australia.
Project 3.3.1. Development of a policy paper on
zoning, explaining the generic principles of zoning
based on pathogen distribution, the movement
principles between zones, and international
relevance of national zoning
The AQUAPLAN Zoning Policy Guidelines were
prepared by a working group involving joint
government and industry input and were
subsequently endorsed by the then SCFA and SCARM
in April and August 2000, respectively. The
AQUAPLAN Zoning Policy Guidelines were widely
distributed amongst stakeholders and were the
subject of a workshop convened by the OCVO in
January 2001. 
Follow-on activities:
Responsibility for institution of zoning lies with
State/Territory jurisdictions.
23

The following projects were added at Annual
AQUAPLAN Stakeholder Workshops:
Project 3.1.5. Development of a ‘surveillance and
monitoring template’ outlining principles of
surveillance and monitoring programs, and
including case studies as examples
In 1999, the Australian Centre for International
Agricultural Research (ACIAR) published the Survey
Toolbox for Livestock Diseases, targeted at
veterinary workers in developing countries. Following
the enthusiastic response from animal health
workers to this book, now translated into four
languages, ACIAR commissioned a version targeted
at aquatic animal health. The book, known
informally as the ‘Tacklebox’, will be published in late
2002. It aims to provide simple, practical and easy to
access methods for conducting aquatic animal
disease surveys, and developing ongoing disease
surveillance systems. Its purpose is to provide the
tools required to generate the reliable disease
information required for effective disease control
and policy development. The Tacklebox18 will be
distributed free of charge to researchers in
developing countries. It will also be available for free
download in electronic format from the author's
website (www.ausvet.com.au).
Project 3.1.6. Involvement of recreational and
capture fisheries in surveillance
Industry awareness of disease has been raised
through participation in the bait survey conducted
by Biosecurity Australia. The survey results will be
available in late 2002. 
Each jurisdiction also has a 24 hour Fish Kill hotline
for reporting of fish kills. These numbers have been
publicised within each jurisdiction and were also
included in the Australian Aquatic Animal Disease
Identification Field Guide. Copies of the Field Guide
have been made available to the recreational fishing
sector at a discounted price.
Australia’s National Code of Practice for Recreational
and Sport Fishing 2001 (available from RecFish’s
website http://www.recfishoz.com/) includes
information on the reporting of fish kills.
Awareness of fish health has also been raised in the
recreational fishing industry through publication in
2002 of an educational article in ‘Angler Action’, the
magazine of the Australian Angling Association.
In the wake of suspicion of WSV in Australian
prawns, capture fisheries have cooperated directly
with the provision of information relating to their
fishing grounds and the results of testing their catch
of prawns for WSV (see also Projects 1.3.1. and 3.1.2.
above).  
Project 3.1.7. Advice on the most appropriate
diagnostic techniques for aquatic animal diseases /
disease agents
A range of Standard Diagnostic Techniques and
Standard Operating Procedures have been
commissioned and, as completed, will be published
on the AFFA website (see Project 3.1.4. above).
The OIE-recommended diagnostic procedures are
available in the OIE’s Diagnostic Manual for Aquatic
Animal Disease which is available on the OIE website
under
http://www.oie.int/eng/normes/fmanual/A_summry.htm.
OCVO staff contributed significantly to the Asia
Diagnostic Guide to Aquatic Animal Disease (see
Project 1.1.1. above).
The Second National Fish Pathologists’ Workshop
2002 agreed that in order to support Consultative
Committee on Emergency Animal Diseases (CCEAD)
activities during an emergency, a set of disease fact
sheets could usefully be produced during non-
emergency times; the Workshop suggested that
24
18 Survey Toolbox for Aquatic Animal Diseases – A practical manual and software package.
Written by Angus Cameron, published by Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research.

Federal Budget Initiative Building a National
Approach to Animal and Plant Health funds be
sought for a project consisting of a stock take of
existing fact sheets; a gap analysis; and the filling of
existing gaps as required.
Project 3.1.8. Addressing the worsening shortage
of diagnostic capacity Australia-wide
An Aquatic Animal Health chapter of the Australian
College of Veterinary Scientists has been established
and conducted its first membership examinations. 
The Second National Fish Pathologists’ Workshop
2002 noted that whilst there is a need for skilled
aquatic animal health veterinarians in
governments and the private sector, and
whilst the current supply of adequately
trained experts is poor, there is, on the
other hand, only limited funding to
create government positions for
aquatic animal health experts and
hence little justification to significantly
expand undergraduate training courses.
However, alternative options to provide training
at undergraduate and postgraduate level should be
explored. At the Workshop, a committee was
established to further develop the options to address
the shortfall in skilled aquatic animal health
veterinarians. The committee will report back to the
2003 workshop.
Project 3.2.2. Zoning – Turning guidelines into
action to manage fish health preparedness and
disease response and to retain market access
The AQUAPLAN Zoning Policy Guidelines (see Project
3.3.1. above) were published in 1999, and a national
workshop was held on this topic in early 2001.
Future activities within the States/Territories are
likely to reflect the individual industries’ needs for
zoning. Some States have existing zoning policies for
specific industries e.g. the zoning policy for the
Western Australian pearling industry. Responsibility
for institution of zoning lies with State/Territory
jurisdictions.
Project 3.2.3 Coordination of consistent
implementation of zoning guidelines across States
and Territories.
Both the AQUAPLAN Zoning Policy Guidelines (see
Project 3.3.1. above) and the National Translocation
Policy for Live Aquatic Organisms were endorsed by
all States and Territories. Therefore, each
jurisdiction’s legislation and implementation of
zoning should be consistent with the policy
guidelines. Responsibility for institution of zoning
lies with State/Territory jurisdictions.
Summary
• All projects within Program 3 are either
completed or are on-going activities. Some of
them those are delivered through the OCVO in
cooperation with the States and Territories.
Other projects are the primary responsibility of
States and Territories. 
• The enhancement of Australia’s diagnostic
capability is significantly supported through the
Federal Budget Initiative Building a National
Approach to Animal and Plant Health program,
administered through the FRDC Aquatic Animal
Health Subprogram. This funding will, however,
expire on 30 June 2004.
• The new projects nominated at AQUAPLAN
Workshops are predominantly in their
early stages. Significant
activity by
States/Territories and
industries will be
necessary to complete
these new projects.
25

Program 4 – Preparedness and Response
Objectives
• To develop effective institutional arrangements
to manage emergency aquatic animal diseases
in Australia.
• To develop a series of manuals and operational
instruments which outline methods and
protocols to manage emergency aquatic disease
outbreaks in Australia (AQUAVETPLAN), based
on the existing AUSVETPLAN arrangements.
Project 4.1.1. Formal inclusion of aquatic animal
disease emergency management into the
Consultative Committee on Emergency Animal
Diseases (CCEAD) operating guidelines
In August 2002, the Primary Industries Standing
Committee (PISC) endorsed a set of new operating
guidelines for Australia’s CCEAD, that clearly assign
and detail CCEAD’s role as the coordinating body
providing the technical link between the
Commonwealth, States, Territories and industry for
the national technical response to terrestrial and
aquatic animal health emergencies.
Project 4.1.2. Ensuring State/Territory
arrangements comply with, and operate within, the
CCEAD structure
White spot virus ‘post-mortem’ exercises were
conducted with AFFA staff, State/Territory Chief
Veterinary Officers and Directors of Fisheries, and
with industry, between October 2001 and February
2002, reviewing not only the response to the specific
incident, but also making recommendations for
CCEAD’s future responses to aquatic disease
emergencies. The Final Report on the Post Mortem
Exercises on the Emergency Management Response 
to Evidence of White Spot Virus in Australia, (May
2002) included a set of recommendations which had
been endorsed by CCEAD and were subsequently
endorsed by PISC in September 2002. Amongst other
things, the Final Report recommended that an
education and training program on the CCEAD
process be developed and undertaken by all
participants of CCEAD including industry. OCVO staff
were successful in obtaining Federal Budget Initiative
Building a National Approach to Animal and Plant
Health funds for a project to enhance emergency
disease management through the education and
training of the CCEAD participants on the CCEAD
process. 
Project 4.1.3. Simulation exercise especially to test
the communication flow
OCVO staff have conducted disease simulation
exercises for government officers and key industry
staff in Queensland for the prawn and redclaw
crayfish industries, in Tasmania for the Atlantic
salmon industry, in Victoria for the trout industry
and in South Australia for the abalone industry. Each
exercise was tailored to the needs and aims of the
particular jurisdiction and included discussions, table
top exercises and field days. 
The Federal Budget Initiative Building a National
Approach to Animal and Plant Health has provided
funding for further exercises in New South Wales
(oysters), Victoria (abalone), Western Australia (non
Pinctada maxima pearl oysters), and the planning of
a multi-state exercise, using the Murray Darling
Basin as a case study.
Project 4.2.1. AQUAVETPLAN Summary Document
Status: Pending
Production of the summary document can only be
completed when a sufficient number of
AQUAVETPLAN manuals have been written.
26

Project 4.2.2. Operational Procedures Manual
Staff within the OCVO have written the
AQUAVETPLAN Operational Procedures - Destruction
and the AQUAVETPLAN Operational Procedures -
Disposal manuals. The manuals were endorsed by
States/Territories and industry and were published in
May 2002. The AQUAVETPLAN Operational
Procedures - Destruction manual provides specific
technical information on the rapid harvesting and
destruction of aquatic animals. Information is
provided that is relevant to finfish, crustacean and
mollusc industries. The AQUAVETPLAN Operational
Procedures - Disposal manual addresses issues such
as safe transport of diseased aquatic animals and the
most appropriate methods for safe disposal of
diseased aquatic animals. Both manuals are designed
to minimise the spread of disease in the face of an
aquatic animal disease emergency. The manuals are
available on the AFFA website
(http://www.affa.gov.au)19. 
Follow-on activities:
The Federal Budget Initiative Building a National
Approach to Animal and Plant Health has provided
funding for another operational manual, the
AQUAVETPLAN Operational Procedures –
Disinfection. This project is to commence in October
2002 and to be completed in September 2003.
Project 4.2.3. Valuation and compensation
Status: Pending
The Valuation and Compensation Manual was not
accorded a high priority in previous stakeholder
consultation rounds conducted to prioritise manual
requirements. Production of this manual will occur
as further funds become available.
Project 4.2.4. Enterprise Manuals
The AQUAVETPLAN Enterprise Manuals were
completed, endorsed by States/Territories and
industry, and published in December 2000. The
AQUAVETPLAN Enterprise Manuals are aimed at both
government and industry personnel who may be
involved in emergency disease preparedness and
response and are designed to enable decision-makers
to access sufficient information on industry practices
and environments to be able to create applicable
control strategies at short notice. The manuals are
also designed to inform industry personnel of the
necessary steps and factors taken into account for
decision-making under emergency conditions. The
AQUAVETPLAN Enterprise Manuals provide brief
information on industry practices and structures and
then outline approaches which should be considered
in the face of an aquatic animal disease emergency.
The AQUAVETPLAN Enterprise Manuals are available
on the AFFA website (http://www.affa.gov.au)20.
Project 4.2.5. Disease Strategy Manuals for
crustaceans, molluscs and fish
Staff within the OCVO have written the
AQUAVETPLAN Disease Strategy Manual –
Furunculosis. The manual was endorsed by
States/Territories and industry and published in June
2001. The AQUAVETPLAN Disease Strategy Manual –
Furunculosis includes information about
furunculosis, its diagnosis and options for controlling
it in case an outbreak is ever suspected or confirmed
in Australia. The AQUAVETPLAN Disease Strategy
Manual – Furunculosis also sets out an integrated
planned approach to controlling furunculosis. The
manual is designed for government and industry and
provides decision-makers with quick and easy access
to the information needed to implement control
27
19 Click on ‘Product Integrity, Animal and Plant Health’ in the OUTPUTS box on the left hand side of the AFFA home-page, then under ‘All Product Integrity / Animal and Plant Health
Documents’, click on the folder ‘AQUAVETPLAN’.
20 Click on ‘Product Integrity, Animal and Plant Health’ in the OUTPUTS box on the left hand side of the AFFA home-page, then under ‘All Product Integrity / Animal and Plant Health
Documents’, click on the folder ‘AQUAVETPLAN’.

strategies at short notice. The manual is available on
the AFFA website (http://www.affa.gov.au)21.
Follow-on activities:
The Federal Budget Initiative Building a National
Approach to Animal and Plant Health has provided
funding for additional disease strategy manuals for
three finfish diseases (viral encephalopathy and
retinopathy; viral haemorrhagic septicaemia;
whirling disease) and two crustacean diseases (white
spot disease; crayfish plague). All manuals will be
completed prior to June 2004.
Project 4.2.6. Management Manuals
The AQUAVETPLAN Control Centres Management
Manual was completed, endorsed by
States/Territories and industry, and published in
February 2002. It outlines the procedures,
management structures and areas of responsibility
that need to be in place at the local, State and
Commonwealth levels in the advent of an outbreak.
Specifically, the manual describes the roles of
response personnel during the initial stages of an
emergency; how to develop and manage disease
control centres, and the various activities that need
to be undertaken in or around infected areas. The
AQUAVETPLAN Control Centres Management Manual
can be used operationally, either as the primary
manual or as a back up for specific action plans; as a
planning tool to help develop more specialised
procedures; and as a reference source in training
exercises. The AQUAVETPLAN Control Centres
Management Manual is available on the AFFA
website (http://www.affa.gov.au)22.
Follow-on activities:
The Federal Budget Initiative Building a National
Approach to Animal and Plant Health has provided
funding to support the production of state-specific
Control Centres Management Manuals.
Project 4.2.7. Agency Support Plans
Status: Pending
Agency Support Plans were not accorded a high
priority in the previous rounds of stakeholder
consultation conducted to prioritise manual
requirements. Production of these plans will occur as
further funds become available.
Project 4.2.8. Review and development of training
resources
Federal Budget Initiative Building a National
Approach to Animal and Plant Health has provided
funding for the development of an aquatic animal
Exotic Disease Training Manual. Another project
funded this way is the development and conduct of
an aquatic animal exotic disease training course to
be held at the CSIRO Australian Animal Health
Laboratory in Geelong (Victoria). One output of the
training course will be a CD-ROM which will be
available as a resource to veterinary practitioners
and pathologists. These projects have commenced
and are to be completed by June 2004.
Project 4.2.9. Diagnostic resources
A range of Standard Diagnostic Techniques (SDTs)
and Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) have been
produced and are available on the AFFA website
(http://www.affa.gov.au)23. Further SDTs and SOPs are
currently being written – see Project 3.1.4. above).
Australian scientists continue to assist in the on-
going revision of the OIE’s Diagnostic Manual for
Aquatic Animal Diseases. 
OCVO staff contributed significantly to the Asia
Diagnostic Guide to Aquatic Animal Disease (see
Project 1.1.1. above).
28
21 Click on ‘Product Integrity, Animal and Plant Health’ in the OUTPUTS box on the left hand side of the AFFA home-page, then under ‘All Product Integrity / Animal and Plant Health
Documents’, click on the folder ‘AQUAVETPLAN’.
22 Click on ‘Product Integrity, Animal and Plant Health’ in the OUTPUTS box on the left hand side of the AFFA home-page, then under ‘All Product Integrity / Animal and Plant Health
Documents’, click on the folder ‘AQUAVETPLAN’.
23 Click on ‘Product Integrity, Animal and Plant Health’ in the OUTPUTS box on the left hand side of the AFFA home-page, then under ‘All Product Integrity / Animal and Plant Health
Documents’, click on the folder ‘AQUAPLAN’. In ‘Overview of the AQUAPLAN Documents’, click folder ‘Standard Diagnostic Techniques’.

In 2000, the Australian Aquatic Animal Diseases
Field Identification Guide was published and
distributed throughout Australia (see Project 5.1.1.
below), and an update and expansion is being
considered. 
The following projects were added at Annual
AQUAPLAN Stakeholder Workshops:
Project 4.2.10. Prioritisation and coordination of
Manuals
As per an Agreement between AFFA and the Fisheries
Research and Development Corporation (FRDC),
funds available for aquatics under the Building a
National Approach to Animal and Plant Health are
administered by the FRDC on AFFA’s behalf. The
FRDC’s vehicle for delivery is the FRDC Aquatic
Animal Health Subprogram. 
In December 2001, governments and researchers as
well as more than 60 key industry associations were
asked to nominate priorities for program ‘Emergency
Management Planning’ under the Federal Budget
Initiative Building a National Approach
to Animal and Plant Health
program. By end of January
2002, thirteen
nominations had been
received. The
Subprogram's Steering
Committee and
Scientific Advisory
Committee evaluated
and shortlisted the
nominations and sought
expressions of interest from
possible providers. Of the
thirteen nominated priorities, ten
progressed into FRDC Board-approved projects all of
which are active at this stage. The first manuals will
be completed in the second half of 2003.
Prioritisation and production of additional manuals
will occur as further funds become available.
Summary
• All projects within Program 4 are either
completed or are on-going activities.
Importantly, arrangements for the CCEAD
response to emergency disease incidents in
aquatic animals have been formalised.
• AQUAVETPLAN and disease response training are
significantly supported through the Federal
Budget Initiative Building a National Approach
to Animal and Plant Health program,
administered through the FRDC
Aquatic Animal Health
Subprogram. This funding
will, however, expire on 30
June 2004.
29

Program 5 – Awareness
Objectives
• To increase awareness of aquatic animal health
issues, by
- providing education and training resources
for all industry stakeholders and the general
public;
- encouraging the development of training and
extension services in State and Territory
Fisheries Departments and within private
industry sector peak body associations;
- encouraging the development of aquatic
animal health management practices which
decrease the reliance on drugs and chemicals
ensuring their appropriate and minimal use.
Project 5.1.1. A Field Identification Guide for
aquatic diseases
The Australian Aquatic Animal Disease Identification
Field Guide was developed by officers within the
Commonwealth Department for Agriculture, Fisheries
and Forestry (AFFA) in close cooperation with
industry, States and Territories, other Commonwealth
departments, the scientific community, and the general
public; it was published in March 2000. The Field Guide
provides an informative account of the diseases and
organisms that threaten Australia’s aquatic animal
industries. It also has information on diseases in
other parts of the world and how they could affect
Australian industries if they were to occur here.
The Field Guide’s key feature is that it targets the
very people whose interests and livelihoods depend
on Australia having a healthy aquatic environment,
the ones with the day-to-day contact with our
aquatic animal life who are well-placed to undertake
the necessary monitoring and surveillance.
Follow-on activities:
The Fisheries Research and Development Corporation
(FRDC) Aquatic Animal Health Subprogram is
considering an update and publication of the Field
Guide on CD ROM.
Project 5.1.2. Summary document providing
information on AQUAVETPLAN emergency response
and preparedness program
A summary of AQUAPLAN, AQUAVETPLAN and the
emergency response to an aquatic animal disease
incursion was published as Exotic Diseases Bulletin
No. 80 in the May 2002 edition of the Australian
Veterinary Journal.
Project 5.1.3. Posters, pamphlets and videos for
industry, veterinarians and the public
The simulation exercise conducted for the redclaw
crayfish industry resulted in the development of a
health plan that will be published and distributed to
all industry members. The simulation exercises for
the abalone industry and the salmon industry also
produced draft emergency management plans which
will be developed by industry and the South
Australian and Tasmanian governments, respectively. 
The Second National Fish Pathologists’ Workshop (June
2002) recommended that an emergency management
video be developed as an aquatic animal health
educational tool. The possibility is under consideration
by the FRDC Aquatic Animal Health Subprogram.
Project 5.1.4. Training for aquaculturists in aquatic
animal health management and improving farm
practices to promote disease prevention
Office of the Chief Veterinary Officer (OCVO) staff
lectured annually at the University of Queensland’s
Aquaculture Health Management course from 1999
to 2001.
AFFA provided input into health management plans
for the abalone aquaculture industry and crayfish
industry in 2001. Simulation exercises in Queensland,
Victoria and South Australia have included extensive
industry participation with special industry days for
members of the prawn and redclaw crayfish industries.
30

Project 5.1.5. Publication of regular columns in
industry or trade journals
AQUAPLAN News are produced within the OCVO at
least every quarter (there were 8 issues in 2001, and
there are 5 issues in 2002 to date), distributed to
stakeholders and placed onto the AFFA Website.
More comprehensive AQUAPLAN Projects Updates
are produced approximately three times a year and
posted onto the AFFA Website.
Articles on specific AQUAPLAN projects have
appeared in the Australian Veterinary Journal, Fish
Farming International, the Global Aquaculture
Advocate, the NACA Newsletter, the Australian
Maritime Digest, the FRDC Research and
Development News and the Australian Prawn Farmer. 
There are also regular contributions to Animal Health
Australia’s Animal Health Surveillance quarterly
brochures and the annual Animal Health in Australia
reports
(http://www.aahc.com.au/communications/index.htm).
The FRDC Aquatic Animal Health Subprogram was
established in mid 2001. The first edition of its
newsletter - Health Highlights – appeared in October
2001. Since then, quarterly issues are produced and
distributed to stakeholders. They are also available
from the Subprogram’s website
(http://www.frdc.com.au/research/programs/aah/).
Project 5.1.6. A Disease Hotline for use by industry
and the general public
Telephone numbers for the ‘Hot Lines’ operated by
each State/Territory were included in the Field Guide
(see Project 5.1.1. above).
Project 5.2.1. Inclusion of aquatic animal health in
veterinary curricula and other tertiary education
Prompted by the Australian Chief Veterinary Officer’s
encouragement of all veterinary schools in Australia,
Melbourne University Veterinary School has
conducted an annual ‘Fish Week’ since 1998. In 2002,
the University of Sydney Veterinary School arranged
two lectures on fish health. Various workshops and
courses are also offered by the University of
Tasmania and the University of Queensland for vets
and non-vets (see Project 5.1.4. above). 
Project 5.2.2. Supporting self-education
AQUAVETPLAN manuals are available at no cost to
all stakeholders. 
An update and publication of the Field Guide on CD
ROM is being considered by the FRDC Aquatic
Animal Health Subprogram. The CD could be
distributed free of charge to all graduating
veterinary students (see Project 5.1.1. above). The
Subprogram is also considering the production of an
emergency management video as an aquatic animal
health educational tool (see Project 5.1.3. above). 
A CD-ROM will be produced as part of the exotic
diseases training program to be conducted by the
CSIRO Australian Animal Health Laboratory (AAHL) in
Geelong, Victoria (see Project 5.2.3. below). This CD-
ROM will be available as a resource to veterinary
practitioners and pathologists.
Project 5.2.3. Post graduate training of
veterinarians, aquatic animal health specialists and
industry groups in the recognition of disease
syndromes
An Aquatic Animal Health chapter of the Australian
College of Veterinary Scientists was established in
2001. The first round of membership examinations
was conducted in June 2002.
The University of Sydney’s Post Graduate Foundation
in Veterinary Science held a well-attended course on
‘Aquaculture and Aquatic Animal Health’ in April 2002.
OCVO staff will participate as instructors in a
specialist Epidemiology Workshop to be held in
31

conjunction with the 5th
Symposium on Diseases in
Asian Aquaculture to be
held in November 2002 on
the Gold Coast in Australia. 
The Federal Budget Initiative
Building a National Approach to
Animal and Plant Health has provided funding for
the development of an aquatic animal Exotic Disease
Training Manual. Another project funded this way is
the development and conduct of an aquatic animal
exotic disease training course to be held at AAHL.
One output of the training course will be a CD-ROM
which will be available as a resource to veterinary
practitioners and pathologists. These projects have
commenced and are to be completed by June 2004.
Project 5.3.1. Support linkages of Governmental
services with Fisheries Departments liaison sections
with industry
The simulation exercises in Tasmania, South Australia,
Queensland and Victoria have provided opportunities
for large numbers of industry representatives to
meet with officers of the various State government
departments. This process has resulted in the
strengthening of relationships between industry and
government and the initiation of a number of joint
industry-government projects in the area of aquatic
animal health e.g. the Macquarie Harbour Emergency
Management Plan, and the Redclaw Crayfish
Industry Health Plan.
Project 5.4.1. Registration and minor use permit
approval for the use of drugs and chemicals in
aquaculture
In late 2001, Crop Protection Approvals (CPA) Ltd.
Research was commissioned by the FRDC to establish
a national system for minor uses of livestock
protection products in aquaculture and fisheries.
This project is designed to establish a system that
will serve the ongoing needs of the aquaculture
industries. Its objectives are: to establish a producer-
driven system to meet the requirements of the
various sectors of aquaculture for registered
products; in consultation with industry bodies, to
develop a blueprint for the system and establish
frameworks for the ownership of data and permits
and for the ongoing servicing and renewal of
permits; and to develop and verify standard
operating procedures for the conduct of GLP -
compliant residue trials. Updates are provided on
CPA’s website (http://www.cpaltd.com.au/fish/).
Project 5.4.2. Encourage the development of
programs to promote the safe, effective and
minimal use of drugs and chemicals
A successful conclusion of Project 5.4.1 will allow
the responsible use of drugs and chemicals in
aquaculture. Legal access to drugs will allow their
use under veterinary supervision and in a responsible
way that does not result in harmful residues in
marketed product or pollution of the environment.
The following projects were added at Annual
AQUAPLAN Stakeholder Workshops:
Project 5.1.7. Professional communication of
AQUAPLAN
Following on from previous communication avenues
(see Projects 5.1.3 and 5.1.5 above), professional
communication will be a key priority task for the
newly suggested Aquatic Animal Health Consultative
Committee (AAHC) and is incorporated into their
business plan (see also Project 8.7. below). It will be a
core duty of the AAHC Executive Officer to optimise
external communications through development of a
communication and extension plan. 
32

Project 5.2.5. Succession planning, and sharing
training materials
The Second National Fish Pathologists’ Workshop
2002 noted that whilst there is a need for skilled
aquatic animal health veterinarians in governments
and the private sector, and whilst the current supply
of adequately trained experts is poor, there is, on the
other hand, only limited funding to create government
positions for aquatic animal health experts and
hence little justification to significantly expand
undergraduate training courses. However, alternative
options to provide training at undergraduate and
postgraduate level should be explored. At the
Workshop, a committee was established to further
develop the options to address the shortfall in skilled
aquatic animal health veterinarians. The committee
will report back to the 2003 workshop.
An Aquatic Animal Health chapter of the Australian
College of Veterinary Scientists has been established
in 2001. The first round of membership examinations
was conducted in June 2002.
The Federal Budget Initiative Building a National
Approach to Animal and Plant Health has provided
funding for the development of an aquatic animal
Exotic Disease Training Manual. Another project
funded this way is the development and conduct of
an aquatic animal exotic disease training course to
be held at AAHL. One output of the training course
will be a CD-ROM which will be available as a
resource to veterinary practitioners and pathologists.
These projects have commenced and are to be
completed by June 2004.
Summary
• Most projects within Program 5 are on-going
activities. A range of educational programs is
now in place for aquatic animal health but more
work remains to be done by educational
institutions and industry.
• Significantly more effort is required in the area
of communication, and this will be a major
focus for the new Aquatic Animal Health
Consultative Committee AAHC.
Program 6 – Research and Development
Objectives
• To identify research priorities in the field of
aquatic animal health and aquatic animal
disease management.
• To promote research and development in these
areas by industry and Government.
Project 6.1.1. Inventory of aquatic animal health
research in Australia
A database of aquatic animal health research
conducted in Australia has been prepared and is
available on the AFFA website (http://www.affa.gov). 
Follow-on activities:
The database is updated annually. 
Project 6.1.2. Prioritisation of research needs by
private sectors and Governments
As per an Agreement between the Commonwealth
Department for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry
(AFFA) and the Fisheries Research and Development
Corporation (FRDC), funds available for aquatics
under the Building a National Approach to Animal
and Plant Health are administered by the FRDC on
AFFA’s behalf. The FRDC’s vehicle for delivery is the
FRDC Aquatic Animal Health Subprogram. 
In April 2001, the Subprogram Leader approached
over fifty industry stakeholder groups with a call for
identification of diagnostic priorities for aquatic
animal health. A pro-forma had previously been
developed, assisting stakeholders in this process. A
draft database on the currently available diagnostic
capability for aquatic animal diseases in Australia
was also provided. The call for priorities was copied
to State and Territory governments and their
Fisheries Research Advisory Bodies (FRABs) as well as
other FRDC Subprograms. In June 2001, the
Subprogram's Steering Committee and Scientific
33

Advisory Committee evaluated and shortlisted the
nominations, developed a set of project
specifications, and disseminated calls for expressions
of interest widely and openly throughout Australia,
including all known and potentially interested
researchers, FRABs and the other FRDC Subprograms.
Of the ten R&D applications, seven were progressed
into FRDC Board-approved projects all of which are
active at this stage. The first diagnostic techniques
will be completed by the end of 2003.
In December 2001, governments and researchers as
well as more than 60 key industry associations were
asked to nominate priorities for programs
‘Emergency Management Planning’ and ‘Emergency
Management Training and Incident Simulation’
under the Federal Budget Initiative Building a
National Approach to Animal and
Plant Health program. By end of
January 2002, over twenty
nominations had been
received. The Subprogram's
Steering Committee and
Scientific Advisory
Committee evaluated and
shortlisted the nominations
and sought expressions of
interest from possible providers. Of
the nominated priorities, 16 progressed
into FRDC Board-approved projects all of which are
active at this stage. 
Project 6.1.3. Development of a strategic research
plan
One of the key tasks of the FRDC Aquatic Animal
Health Subprogram (established in mid 2001) is to
develop – in consultation with stakeholders – a
strategic plan for aquatic animal health. 
To kick-start the process of developing this plan, the
Subprogram's Steering Committee and Scientific
Advisory Committee held a one-day workshop with
key stakeholders in April 2002. A draft plan –
developed at the workshop – was circulated to a
wider group of stakeholders for comment, revised,
and resubmitted to stakeholders for final
endorsement. The plan is available on the
Subprogram’s website
(http://www.frdc.com.au/research/programs/aah/inde
x.htm).
Follow-on activities:
The plan has been developed for a five-year period
(2002-2007) after which a full review will be
conducted. The plan will also be updated annually.
Project 6.2.1. Prioritisation of research into import
replacements
Each year, industries provide input into the
establishment of the FRDC’s research priorities, e.g.
through participation in the FRAB process. 
In addition, industries have also provided input into
development of the strategic research plan (see
Project 6.1.3. above). 
Project 6.2.2. Aquatic disease management (to
prevent disease)
As an output of simulation exercises conducted to
date, staff from the Office of the Chief Veterinary
Officer (OCVO) have assisted the abalone, redclaw
and salmonid industries with the development of
industry health or disease management plans.
Conduct of industry days as part of each simulation
exercise resulted in a large proportion of industry
members participating in the development of these
health plans.
Project 6.2.3. Development of new diagnostic tests
The development of Standard Diagnostic Techniques
(SDTs) (see Project 3.1.4. above) includes the
development of new tests where appropriate.
34

The following project was added at an Annual
AQUAPLAN Stakeholder Workshop:
Project 6.2.4. Project Health R&D for infant
industries and new aquaculture species
The scope of the FRDC Aquatic Animal
Health Subprogram is ‘health’ with a
focus on infectious diseases. In
particular this Subprogram – which
was established in mid 2001 – will
manage health-related projects on new
or emerging species (‘orphan species’). 
The Federal Budget Initiative Building a
National Approach to Animal and Plant Health has
provided funding for the development of better
diagnostic techniques for infections with Vibrio spp.
and with nodaviruses, pathogens that affect a range
of aquaculture species including several infant
industries (e.g. striped trumpeter).
Summary
• Most projects within Program 6 are on-going
activities. Responsibility for strategic research
has been transferred to the FRDC Aquatic
Animal Health Subprogram.
Program 7 – Legislation, Policies and
Jurisdiction
Objectives
• To facilitate the implementation of surveillance
and control strategies, and preparedness and
response arrangements for aquatic animal
diseases at the State and Territory level.
• To ensure that legislative and jurisdictional
mechanisms are in place to effectively manage
aquatic animal health in Australia.
• To establish National Policy Guidelines on the
Translocation of Live Aquatic Organisms within
Australia which provide means to better manage
the risks associated with the introduction of
aquatic pests and translocation of aquatic
animals.
Project 7.1.1. Identify and work towards necessary
legislative and jurisdictional outcomes
A draft report prepared by the then Standing
Committee on Agriculture and Resource
Management (SCARM) Taskforce on Uniform
Agricultural Plant and Animal Health Legislation on
the feasibility of a proposal for such legislation was
submitted to the then Standing Committee on
Fisheries and Aquaculture (SCFA) in February 2000,
for information and comment if required. A cost
benefit analysis of such legislation was submitted to
the SCARM meeting held in August 2001.
Subsequent efforts were focussed on ensuring that
each jurisdiction had the appropriate legislative
powers required for management of
an emergency disease incident.
The adequacy of this
legislation was tested
during the Australia-
wide simulation exercise
‘Exercise Minotaur’.
35

Project 7.1.2. Encourage the States and Territories
to critically assess their existing systems regarding
gaps, legal challenges, and extent of enforcement
Some simulation exercises (see Project 4.1.3. above)
identified shortcomings in State legislation regarding
the management of emergency disease incidents, for
example, relating to the right of entry and the
ability to search properties. The relevant jurisdictions
are reviewing their legislation and are considering
the action required to address these gaps. For
included fish under that State’s Stock Act, thus
providing greater legal powers during an emergency
incident. 
Participants at the Second National Fish Pathologists’
Workshop (June 2002) discussed the option of
making diseases on the National List of Reportable
Diseases of Aquatic Animals legally notifiable in
each jurisdiction. This may make changes to the
National List more cumbersome; however, it could be
beneficial to fulfil overseas market access
requirements. Each jurisdiction will explore potential
gains versus logistics of making diseases on National
List legally notifiable.
Project 7.1.3. Encourage States and Territories to
adopt the generic principles and adjust their
systems accordingly, to ensure agreed-upon
outcomes
The process described under Project 7.1.1. has led to
a review of emergency disease management
legislation in each jurisdiction. Conduct of ‘Exercise
Minotaur’ has provided an opportunity to assess the
efficacy of legislation. 
The Federal Budget Initiative Building a National
Approach to Animal and Plant Health has provided
funding for the design and organisation of a multi-
state disease emergency simulation exercise for the 
aquatic sector; this exercise, which suggests the
Murray Darling Basin as a case study, will test the
applicability of legislation to disease emergencies in
fisheries and aquaculture.
Project 7.1.4. Legislation for normal activity
(surveillance) as opposed to disease outbreaks
Individual States/Territories have varying levels of
surveillance activity. For example, Tasmania has
active surveillance programs for both salmon and
oyster industries, and Western Australia has an active
surveillance program for the pearling industries.
Legislation covering surveillance is implemented by
individual jurisdictions to address the specific needs
of that jurisdiction and its constituent industries.
Project 7.1.5. Provide SCARM/SCFA with
recommendations to improve reporting and
management of aquatic animal disease outbreaks
A comprehensive briefing to Standing Committees in
2001 led to their endorsement of the review (‘post
mortem’) into the response to the white spot virus
(WSV) incident, and agreement to consider
alterations to the Consultative Committee on
Emergency Animal Diseases (CCEAD) Operating
Guidelines. The final report and recommendations
arising from the post mortem exercises were
endorsed by CCEAD and by the Primary Industries
Standing Committee (replacing SCARM and SCFA) in
September 2002. See Project 4.1.2. above for details.
Follow-on activities:
Office of the Chief Veterinary Officer (OCVO) staff
were successful in obtaining Federal Budget Initiative
Building a National Approach to Animal and Plant
Health funds for a project to enhance emergency
disease management through the education and
training of the CCEAD participants on the CCEAD
process. 
36

Project 7.2.1. Agree on a national approach to
translocation of aquatic animals through SCFA and
its subcommittees Aquaculture Committee and
Environment and Health Committee
The National Policy for the Translocation of Live
Aquatic Organisms was published in 1999 and was
endorsed by all jurisdictions through the then
Ministerial Council on Forestry, Fisheries and
Aquaculture (MCFFA). States and Territories are at
various stages of implementation of the National
Policy.
Follow-on activities:
All jurisdictions agreed to develop state translocation
policies that are consistent with the guidelines.
Project 7.2.2. Agree on a national approach to
policy for the post quarantine management of
imported fish and aquatic products
The involvement of imported prawns in the WSV
incident in Darwin heightened the awareness of
individual States/Territories for the need for post
quarantine management of imported fish and
aquatic products. This incident allowed several
jurisdictions to determine whether their legislation
was adequate to manage post-quarantine matters.
Some jurisdictions have
legislation in place to
manage post-
quarantine issues.
Project 7.2.3. Implement the necessary changes to
legislative arrangements, policies and regulations
at the State / Territory government level
See Projects listed above. Individual jurisdictions are
at various stages of implementation.
The following project was added at an Annual
AQUAPLAN Stakeholder Workshop:
Project 7.2.4. Translocation of bait and other non-
viable fish product
Biosecurity Australia is currently conducting a survey
amongst recreational fishers to gather information
on the movement and use of bait and berley. The
survey results will be available in late 2002.
RecFish Australia’s National Code of Practice for
Recreational and Sport Fishing 2001 (available from
RecFish’s website http://www.recfishoz.com/)
requires:
• the return of live bait to waters from which it
came 
• the avoidance of imported product as bait 
• not leaving unused bait at fishing sites
Summary
• Whilst some progress has been made in
Program 7, substantially greater attention and
coordination is required from individual
jurisdictions to address the projects in this
program. This will be a key area for the new
Aquatic Animal Health Consultative Committee
(AAHC).
37

Program 8 – Resources and Funding
Objectives
• To develop a cost-sharing arrangement between
industry and Government which underpins the
funding of emergency response mechanisms;
• To assess the resources required to support the
implementation of projects necessary to
maintain high standards of aquatic animal
health management in Australia.
Project 8.1.1. Examine the Australian Animal
Health Council funding structures for the
terrestrial animal industries as a potential model
to be applied to the aquatic animal industries
The Federal Budget Initiative Building a National
Approach to Animal and Plant Health provided
funding to retain a consultant to examine Animal
Health Australia (AHA) – a not-for profit public
company established by governments and livestock
industries and formerly known as the Australian
Animal Health Council – as a model for aquaculture
industries. Through the use of a questionnaire and
stakeholder meetings in each capital city, three AHA-
related options were identified for the aquatic
industry:
• Forming an AHA equivalent specifically for
aquatic industries;
• Aquatic industries becoming individual members
of AHA;
• Aquatic industries forming an AHA subsidiary.
At a final stakeholder meeting in August 2001, these
options were rejected in favour of a low-cost
alternative, that is, to reconstitute the Fish Health
Management Committee (FHMC) as the Aquatic
Animal Health Committee (AAHC), with revised Terms
of Reference and a dedicated funding basis (see also
Project 8.6. below).
A working group to review FHMC and recommend
revised Terms of Reference etc was established at the
August 2001 stakeholder meeting (see Project 8.7.
below).
Project 8.2.1. Funding to Underpin Aquatic Animal
Disease Emergency Preparedness and Response
Arrangements (AQUAVETPLAN)
AQUAVETPLAN has received considerable impetus
from the injection of the Federal Budget Initiative
Building a National Approach to Animal and Plant
Health program. See Projects under Program 4 above
for details.
Further development of AQUAVETPLAN will rely on
availability of funds. 
Project 8.3.1. Continuing Funding to Support
Disease Monitoring and Surveillance and Reporting
Activities
A review of surveillance and monitoring for aquatic
animal health in Australia recommended the
establishment of an Australian Aquatic Animal
Health Information Service (AAAHIS) to provide a
centre for surveillance data storage and collation
(see Projects 3.1.1. and 3.1.3. above). On industry
advice, funding to establish AAAHIS was
incorporated into the proposed budget for AAHC,
however, this was not endorsed by the Primary
Industries Standing Committee (PISC) in September
2002. It is now up to AAHC to determine whether
the AAAHIS is to go ahead as planned with initial
funding for the first 30 months of operation.
Funding beyond that point in time will be linked to
the future of AAHC and the mechanism for
management of aquatic animal health within
Australia.
Project 8.4.1. Encouraging the development of
undergraduate and postgraduate veterinary and
aquatic animal health training
This is an on-going activity that is addressed in detail
in Projects 5.2.1. and 5.2.3. above.
38

Project 8.4.2. Codes of Practice in aquatic animal
health management
Assistance has been provided to individual industries
(abalone, salmonid, redclaw) in the preparation of
industry health and/or emergency management plans
(see Project 6.2.2. above). 
Other industries – for example the Western Australia
pearling industries – have developed Codes of
Practice that include sections on animal health and
disease management.
Project 8.4.3. Increased general public awareness
of aquatic animal health issues, especially through
the aquarium and recreational fishing industries
The survey of bait and berley usage being conducted
by Biosecurity Australia has raised the general
awareness of health issues amongst recreational fishers.
The report is to be finalised by the end of 2002.
RecFish Australia’s National Code of Practice for
Recreational and Sport Fishing 2001 (available from
RecFish’s website http://www.recfishoz.com/) includes
sections on responsible bait usage and the reporting
of dead aquatic animals or aquatic pests. 
Awareness of fish health has also been raised in the
recreational fishing industry through publication in
2002 of an educational article in ‘Angler Action’, the
magazine of the Australian Angling Association.
The Pet Industry Joint Advisory Council of Australia
Ltd (PIJAC) has developed a Code of Practice for
Aquariums (available on the PIJAC website under
http://www.pijac.com.au/member/index.html) which
stipulates that
• “Members shall not offer for sale any aquatic
animal that is known to be suffering from disease,
illness or injury and shall seek proper advice as to
the treatment of such aquatic animals in their
care. In such cases, the aquatic animal should be
placed in quarantine until treatment has been
effected”, and that
• “Any dead aquatic animal shall be disposed of in a
manner that will not render the likelihood of any
disease being released into natural waterways, e.g.
in garbage used as landfill, and not via storm
water. “
Some of the other recommendations, for example on
animal welfare, also are relevant to aquatic animal
health.
Project 8.5.1. Presentation of information by an
aquaculture industry insurance expert
Status: Pending
Initial consultations with insurance experts have
been completed, and the issue has also been
discussed in the Resources and Funding Consultancy
(see Project 8.6. below). The project will need to be
taken up by the AAHC as a priority issue.
Project 8.5.2. Separately address the issues of
compensation versus major loss due to disease
Status: Pending
These issues are briefly discussed in the Resources
and Funding Consultancy (see Project 8.6. below).
The project will need to be taken up by the AAHC as
a priority issue.
The following projects were added at Annual
AQUAPLAN Stakeholder Workshops:
Project 8.6. High-level consultancy (out of AFFA
Federal Budget Initiative funds) to examine all
aspects of resource and funding, including
insurance and levies; joint industry/government
bodies; industries’ needs for/costings of discrete
programs
The Federal Budget Initiative Building a National
Approach to Animal and Plant Health provided
funding to retain a consultant during 2001; the final
report of the consultancy was published in early
39

2002 and is available from the Fisheries Research and
Development Corporation as Report # 2000/601
‘AQUAPLAN Resources and Funding Consultancy’.
Regarding a future joint industry/government body
for aquatic animal health, the consultancy through
extensive stakeholder consultation recommended the
reconstitution of FHMC as the AAHC, with revised
Terms of Reference and a dedicated funding basis
(see also Project 8.1.1. above). A working group to
review FHMC and recommend revised Terms of
Reference etc. was established and reported back to
FHMC in December 2001 (see Project 8.7. below). 
The consultants were also to consider the role of
insurance in compensating for loss due to disease
and prescribed slaughter; they found that a clear
framework for compensation arrangements in the
event of a nationally significant disease outbreak in
aquatic animals is required. They identified that
current industry-government agreements do not
include provision for government compensation
during a disease outbreak in the aquatic animal
sector. Access to private insurance has the potential
to close this gap. However, for insurance to close this
gap, a system would need to be established that
facilitates early disease reporting and improves the
capacity of insurers to assess the risks.
Follow-on activities:
The various follow-on activities are described in
detail under ‘Permanent consultative body’ at the
beginning of this brochure. They have led to the
establishment of the AAHC.
Project 8.7 FHMC Working Group to review FHMC
and make recommendations regarding a more
effective implementation of AQUAPLAN.
A Working Group established by FHMC in August
2001 suggested the reconstitution of FHMC as a new
body, the AAHC, with new Terms of Reference, and a
dedicated funding basis. In November 2001, FHMC
concurred with the Working Group’s report that the
new AAHC should report to PISC. 
Follow-on activities:
The various follow-on activities are described in
detail under ‘Permanent consultative body’ at the
beginning of this brochure. They have led to the
establishment of the AAHC.
Summary
• Program 8 has been the most difficult
AQUAPLAN Program to implement. Stakeholders
have clearly identified their preference for a low
cost option for the future management of
aquatic animal health in Australia. For the first
2.5 years, AAHC core funding will be derived
from governments only (50% Commonwealth;
50% States and the Northern Territory in
aggregate), however, this core funding will not
provide for actual projects.
• It is crucial for the effective and sustainable
management of aquatic animal health jointly by
governments and industry that a true tri-partite
funding arrangement be developed by AAHC as
a key priority, to enable industry contributions
after 30 June 2005.
40

DESIGN DIRECTION 2790
AQUAPLAN - a five year review can be downloaded from the web: www.affa.gov.au