The department recognises that the Middle East Regional Conflict is impacting the agricultural, fisheries and forestry sectors across Australia.
The Australian Government is working together to address these issues.
Fuel and fertiliser security
The Australian Government has acted to secure fuel and fertiliser supplies for Australian farmers. We have:
- established the Fuel and Fertiliser Security Facility (FSFF) to provide underwriting arrangements through Export Finance Australia (EFA) to support fertiliser imports
- supported industry in securing the delivery of an additional 250,000 tonnes of agricultural grade urea from Indonesia for Australian farmers
- streamlined border processes for imported fertiliser to reduce costs and port clearance times, and ensure the quality of fertiliser prior to shipping, without compromising on biosecurity
  - see more on chemical and mined fertiliser
- established the Fertiliser Supply Working Group for government and industry to share insights and work together to help secure reliable supply and monitor distribution
- continued to work with industry to engage with alternative suppliers of fertiliser
- engaged directly with industry and other stakeholders through ongoing forums and roundtable discussions
The department will continue to monitor fuel and fertiliser supply and work with industry to identify sector impacts, address supply and demand pressure points and respond to supply issues as they emerge.
ABARES have published a fertiliser dashboard with the latest import information and indicator prices for fertiliser-grade as well as import information on other fertiliser imports.
National Cabinet has agreed to the National Fuel Security Plan, and a national fuel supply taskforce will coordinate fuel security and strengthen supply chain resilience with the states and territories.
Learn more about Australia’s fuel security and how businesses are being supported.
Economic Resilience Program
Support provided through the Economic Resilience Program is designed to assist logistics and manufacturing businesses in areas such as freight, fuel, plastics and fertiliser who are impacted by market disruptions related to current conflicts and global price rises for key inputs.
Eligible Australian businesses will have access to zero interest loans to support identified industries impacted by market disruptions, or help maintain and build national strategic and economic resilience.
Advice for DSS-funded service providers experiencing fuel supply disruptions
The department understands that localised fuel supply disruptions and associated financial pressures may be placing pressure on the children, families, and communities you support, and on your organisation’s day-to-day operations.
The Australian Government is responding through a coordinated national approach focused on maintaining fuel availability, protecting essential services, and supporting supply chain continuity. All government agencies are working closely together, with sectors and industries to manage pressures while ensuring communities and services continue to operate.
Australia is currently operating at Level 2 — “Keep Australia Moving.” Fuel is continuing to flow, with increased coordination and precautionary measures in place. The department is working across Government to closely monitor conditions and be ready to support local services if the operating environment changes.
Your funding agreements allow flexibility in how services are delivered. Where local fuel disruptions affect service delivery, providers are encouraged to use existing flexibilities, including virtual delivery options, where appropriate.
We will continue to work with the community sector to consider whether additional flexibilities are needed.
If you would like to discuss your circumstances, please contact your Funding Arrangement Manager.
We are committed to working collaboratively with service providers and peak bodies to support service continuity. We will continue to keep you informed, and we sincerely thank you for the important work you do every day to support children, families and communities.
For further information or assistance, please contact us.
Industry export advice
You can find the latest export advice on the 2026 Market access advice notices.
Bringing cats and dogs to Australia
Pet owners travelling from the Middle East
If you and your pets are impacted by the Middle East conflict, contact us for advice on your situation.
Phone: 1800 900 090 (Australia)
Phone: +61 3 8318 6700 (overseas)
Email: imports@aff.gov.au
We recognise the significant stress for people trying to secure the safety of themselves and their pets in this uncertain environment in the Middle East.
Import requirements for cats and dogs from Middle Eastern countries have not changed. To bring your cats and dogs to Australia, you must meet all requirements.
Follow our step-by-step guides to bring your cat or dog to Australia.
Rural support and resources
Support is always available to help farmers and producers experiencing financial or personal hardship.
The Rural Financial Counselling Service (RFCS) provides free and independent financial counselling to eligible primary producers and small businesses.
Call the RFCS Network national information line on 1300 771 741.
See more on: