Page 17
GENETICALLY MODIFIED CROPS IN
AUSTRALIA
Current Issue
Genetic modification continues to be contentious in Australia.
North Queensland Register outlines GM seed spillage issues in West
Australia “GM seed spillage renews calls for ban” (25 August 2011).
Australian article says “Organic farmer sues over GM taint” (28 July 11).
Daily Telegraph article covers “Attack on GM wheat” (16 July 2071).
Talking Points
In Australia, geneticaily modified organisms and genetically
‘|
modified foods are regulated through an integrated legislative
framework.
e The framework is three-tiered: genetically modified crops are
not released to farmers unless they have been assessed as
safe for human health and the environment; genetically
modified foods are not approved for sale unless they have
been assessed as safe; and foods that are approved must be
labelled to allow consumer choice.
e The intentional release of a genetically modified crop into the
Australian environment must be licensed by the Gene
Technology Regulator. The license will only be issued if risks
can be managed so as to protect the health and safety of
people and the environment.
e Economic and marketing considerations such as coexistence
and segregation in agricultural supply chains are addressed
through state specific requirements and industry protocols.
Decisions on whether to allow genetically modified crop
production in part or all of a state or territory are a matter for
that jurisdiction.
e Food Standards Australia New Zealand administers the
regulation and labelling of genetically modified foods and
ingredients and assesses all genetically modified foods for
human consumption on a case by case basis.
e The safety assessment protocol used by Food Standards
Australia New Zealand for genetically modified foods is based
oe
Paget

eee’
on internationally recognised principles for assessing the safety
of whole foods.
Key Facts
If asked: seed spillage of GM canola in WA
| am aware of the spillage of Roundup Ready GM Canola on the Albany
Highway in south-west Western Australia earlier this month.
Decisions to permit genetically modified crop production are a matter for
that jurisdiction. Containment, coexistence and segregation are also
managed through state-specific requirements, combined with industry
protocols.
;
[understand that the transport company involved has a well-established
management procedure in place for clean-up of grain spills and that the
weeks.
Herbicides other than Roundup can be effectively used to control any
plants that may germinate.
If asked: contamination of organic farm with GM canola in WA
|am aware that there is a legal dispute between two West Australian
farmers over a GM canola crop contaminating an organic farm.
From a national perspective, the Gene Technology Regulator has
approved the commercial release of GM canola.
Decisions to permit genetically modified crop production are a matter for
thatjurisdiction. Coexistence and segregation are also managed through
state-specific requirements, combined with industry protocols.
It would be inappropriate for me to comment on any legal action.
If asked: CSIRO GM wheat trials
The CSIRO GM wheat field trial was approved in 2009 under strict
containment conditions by the Gene Technology Regulator after
;
conducting a rigorous science-based risk assessment and extensive
consultation.
©
;
This trial is not secret - details,.including trial locations, have been
available on the Regulator’s website since 2009.
e¢
There has been no breach of containment for any GM wheat trials and
wheat from these trials cannot enter the human or animal food supplies.
To date, there has been no commercial release of GM wheat in
Australia, nor has any application for commercial release been
submitted to the regulator.
CSIRO has stated it has no immediate plans to conduct human GM
wheat trials and has only sought approval from the Regulator for future
trials if and when they are needed, and that the animal trials are still
continuing.
mm
Page2zof4st~=<CS~s‘“‘—*S*s*s*~*S~S~S~S~S~SSS

Page 19
Question
Time Brief
This research could have positive health impacts not only for the lifestyle
related diseases that affect Australians, but also for developing regions.
e«
lam advised that the incident of vandalism of
a CSIRO GM wheat field
trial is being investigated by the police and the Gene Technology
Regulator.
if
Background
GM Canola Spillage
About 15 tonnes of GM canola was spilt near the West Australian town of Williams
on 11 August 2011.
The grain handler CBH has advised that the canola seed, gravel and top soil from
the surrounding area has been removed and will work with the West Australian
Government to monitor the site to mitigate any risk of contamination.
Roundup Ready canola is not resistant to other herbicides used for control of broad
leaf weeds.
The site of the accident is 100 km north of the organic farm involved in the legal
dispute over GM contamination, and is within a zone of 12 grain growers who have
declared themselves ‘GM-free’.
GM Liability issues
A Statutory Review of the Gene Technology Act 2000 was conducted in 2005. The
review considered issues such as strict liability for contamination and concluded that
specific provisions should not be introduced on strict liability, compensation funds,
mandatory insurance and third party appeals.
—
The Statutory Review recommended that the Act should be reviewed every five
years. The Department of Health and Ageing is currently conducting a review
of the Act to ensure that it continues to accommodate emerging trends.
State reviews of genetically modified crop legislation concluded that liability
concerns can be adequately dealt with through common law and consumer
protection legislation and therefore there is no need for additional liability measures
}
to be put in place.
Greenpeace and the CSIRO GM wheat trials
Media reports that in May 2011, Greenpeace lodged an FOI request with CSIRO for
all documents relating to nutritional testing CSIRO had conducted, or will conduct,
on pigs, rats or humans, with food produced using GM.
Having identified 1042 related documents, CSIRO denied the request, citing the
539 hours required to process them as unreasonably resource intensive and not in
the public interest. CSIRO suggested the request be modified to exclude documents
relating to a project being undertaken on a commercial footing.
GM foods
e More than 45 genetically modified foods have been approved to date.
Food Standards Australia New Zealand will not approve a genetically modified food
for sale or use if there is evidence it would pose a risk to public health and safety.
Foods. from approved genetically modified crops have been consumed since
genetically modified crops were first grown commercially in six countries in 1996,
including the United States.
Scientific evidence indicates that feeding genetically modified plant material to
livestock does not affect the nutritional value or safety of the meat, milk and eggs
Page 3 of 4

Page 20
.
. Question Time Brief
derived from those animals. As these food products are not genetically modified,
they are not required to be labelled as such.
Genetically modified foods are required to be labelled in accordance with the
Australia New Zealand Food Standards Code, enabling consumers to make
'
informed choices about what they eat.
GM crops
IL
The Minister
forHealth and Ageing, the Hon. Nicola Roxon MP, has the lead
'
organisms and genetically modified foods.
— The Gene Technology Regulator is an independent statutory office holder in
the Health Portfolio, responsible for the Gene Technology Act 2000.
The Regulator has approved the commercial release of several varieties of cotton,
canola, carnations and a rose; and has issued licences for field trials of crops as
diverse as banana, sugarcane, wheat and barley, pineapple, papaya, white clover
and grapevines, as well as the ornamental! plant, torenia.
In 2011, 700 000 hectares of genetically modified canola and cotton was planted in
Australia. 2010 was the third year genetically modified canola could be grown
commercially in New South Wales (24 040 hectares) and Victoria (36 500 hectares).
It was the first year genetically modified canola could be grown commercially in
Western Australia (72 790 hectares).
Tasmania has a moratorium on the commercial release of genetically modified
moratorium on genetically modified food crops until 2019.
Potential benefits of GM
Biotechnology, including the development of genetically modified crops, can assist in
increasing agricultural productivity in the face of climate change, resource
constraints and the pressures of providing a secure food supply.
Genetically modified crops can benefit the environment by changing the way farmers
manage their crops.
e ABAREs released two reports in 2008 which found that genetic modification of crops
is delivering significant cost savings to farmers in other countries.
/
Australian growers could lose significant market share if their access to genetically
f
modified crop technology is restricted.
Contact Officer:
Leanne Hodge
SES Officer:
Michael Ryan
Telephone:
Telephone: |
1
seeneean
esnetnnn
enna
_
a
Page 4 of 4