1
Page 85
SENATE ESTIMATES — OCTOBER 2010
GENETICALLY MODIFIED CROPS AND FooD
GENE TECHNOLOGY REGULATION
Detailed questions on the regulation of genetically modified organisms (GMOs) and
genetically modified (GM) foods should be referred to the Department of Health and
Ageing.
The regulation of GMOs and GM food in Australia is achieved through an integrated
legislative framework which includes the Gene Technology Regulator (the Regulator) and
Food Standards Australia New Zealand (FSANZ).
Dealings with live and viable GMOs are regulated under the Gene Technology Act 2000.
The object of the Act is: “to protect the health and safety of people, and to protect the
environment, by identifying risks posed by or as a result of gene technology, and by
managing those risks through regulating certain dealings with GMOs”. The intentional
release of
a GMO into the Australian environment such as commercial release of a
GM crop, must be licensed by the Gene Technology Regulator, and can only be licensed if
.
risks can be managed so as to protect the health and safety of people and the environment.
Assessment of GMOs intended for release into the environment involves analysis of data
supplied by the applicant (e.g. Monsanto, CSIRO) and a comprehensive review by the
Gene Technology Regulator of independent, peer reviewed scientific literature.
An independent statutory review of the operation of the Act was conducted in 2005-06,
commissioned by the Gene Technology Ministerial Council, consistent with the legislative
requirement to conduct such a review. The Review Panel concluded that the regulatory
system had been functioning effectively, the Act had been rigorously implemented with a
high level of transparency, and the current scope should be maintained. The Australian
and all state and territory governments endorsed these findings.
GM foods are regulated under Standard 1.5.2 — Food produced using Gene Technology,
contained in the Australia New Zealand Food Standards Code. This standard ensures that
GM foods cannot enter the food supply unless they have been assessed as safe for sale for
human consumption by
FSANZ. To allow consumers to make an informed choice, the
standard also states human food derived from GM crops must be labelled as GM if any
genetic material and/or protein other than that normally present in the food is contained in
the final product.
GM CROPS IN AUSTRALIA
To date the Regulator has approved the commercial release of several varieties of cotton,
canola, carnations and a rose; and has issued licences for field trials of crops as diverse as
sugarcane, wheat and barley, pineapple, white clover and grapevines, as well as the
ornamental plant, torenia.
Varieties of GM cotton have been grown in Australia since 1996 and now make up around
95 per cent of the crop.
Agrifood Awareness Australia report that in 2010 around 133,300 hectares of GM canola
have been planted in NSW (24,040 ha), Victoria (36,500 ha) and Western Australia
(72,790ha). This represents around 8 per cent of the total canola crop in Australia.
7
On 6 October 2010 the Weekly Times reported NSW expects to harvest 42,000 tonnes of
GM canola; and Victoria expects to harvest 58,000 tonnes. The report notes GM canola
yields in Western Australia may be lower than eastern areas due to drought conditions.
}

Page 86
State Moratoria
Decisions on whether to allow GM production in part or all of a state or territory are a
matter for that jurisdiction.
In 2003, the Gene Technology Regulator issued licenses for the commercial release of
‘InVigor’ and ‘Roundup Ready’ canola after examining their health and environmental
impacts and determining these varieties were as safe as conventional canola.
Subsequently, all states and territories, except Queensland and the Northern Territory,
enacted GM crop moratorium legislation to delay the commercial production of approved
GM canola until marketing and trade considerations had been addressed. Most states have
now reviewed, or are in the process of reviewing, the need for a moratorium.
/
South Australia has a moratorium on GM food crops which will expire in 2019. GM crops
in South Australia are regulated under the Genetically Modified Crops Management Act
2004 (SA). Pursuant to the Genetically Modified Crops Management (Designation of
Areas) Regulations 2004 (SA) a prohibition was placed on the cultivation of all types of
GM food crops. On 28 April 2008 the Regulations, which designated the whole of the
State as an area in which no GM food crops may be cultivated, were extended indefinitely.
Under the Subordinate Legislation Act 1978 (SA) these regulations will expire in 2019
unless reviewed earlier.
Tasmania was declared
a GMO-free area pursuant to the Genetically Modified Organisms
Control Act 2004 (Tas). The Tasmanian cabinet announced in November 2008 that the
state’s moratorium on GM food crops would continue until November 2014.
In Western Australia, the Genetically Modified Crops Free Areas Act 2003 (WA)
prohibits the cultivation of all commercial GM crops in the state unless exemption orders
have been issued. On 25 January 2010 the WA government announced an exemption to to
allow GM canola to be grown in WA from 2010 onwards. This follows the government’s
/
decision in November 2008 to lift its moratorium on growing GM cotton in the Ord River
Irrigation Area and to allow a commercial trial of GM canola in 2009. Exemption orders
under the Act have also been issued for scientific research and field trials.
The New South Wales Parliament passed the Gene Technology (New South Wales) Act
2003 and the Gene Technology (GM Crop Moratorium) Act 2003 (NSW) to prohibit the
production of specified GM food crops. On 14 March 2008 the NSW Primary Industries
Minister announced approval had been granted for GM canola to be grown commercially
in NSW after being satisfied that industry had adequately identified the requirements of
key markets and can segregate GM product if required. The moratorium remains in place
for the commercial production of all other GM food crops in NSW.
f
In 2004, Victoria introduced an order under the Control of Genetically Modified Crops Act
2004 (Vic) to prohibit the production of GM canola. Following a review, Victoria’s
moratorium order on the commercial cultivation of GM canola was allowed to lapse on
29 February 2008, enabling production of GM canola from the 2008 growing season. The
default position in Victoria is that all federally approved GM food crops may be
immediately commercially released unless an order prohibiting their cultivation is made
under the Act.
The Australian Capital Territory, which is regulated by the Gene Technology Act 2003
(ACT) and the Gene Technology (GM Crop Moratorium) Act 2004 (ACT), prohibited the
growing of commercial GM food crops until June 2006. In April 2008 the ACT introduced
the Gene Technology Amendment Act 2008 (ACT) which made amendments to the

Page 87
SENATE ESTIMATES —OCTOBER 2010
regulatory system to bring it in line with NSW. Under the current legislation, it is an
offencé to deal with
a GMO unless that product has been granted a GMO licence.
GM Canola: Segregation and Coexistence
The grains industry believes it has the capacity to manage the commercialisation of
—
GM canola to maintain or enhance trade in Australian canola and to enable market choice
along the supply chain.
Farmers make commercial decisions, including to operate
organically or to grow non-GM or GM crops. Farmers seeking to capture a premium may
incur additional costs.
Growers are required by Monsanto to undertake stewardship training before they can
purchase seed. Objectives of the stewardship training include optimising agronomic
performance, managing on-farm segregation and managing herbicide resistance.
j
In February 2010 the Primary Industries Standing Committee Industries Development
Committee noted a joint report prepared by Grain Trade Australia and the Australian
Oilseed Federation, Market Choice in the Canola Industry — 2008/9 Final Stakeholders
Report, outlining how the GM canola supply chain performed within the industry’s market
choice (coexistence) framework in the 2008-09 season. The framework includes
identification of market requirements, establishment of adventitious presence threshold
levels; and having supply chain processes in place to meet market requirements including
segregation protocols. Industry is using buffer zones to assist with segregation ofGM and
non-GM crops, and has produced guidelines for clean-down of harvesting equipment. The
stakeholders report indicated that the market choice protocols adopted by industry in 2008
were effective and no revision of the protocols was required.
The Australian canola industry has historically had one grade of canola. Following the
lifting of restrictions on the commercial production ofGM canola in NSW and Victoria,
the Australian Oilseeds Federation and Grain Trade Australia introduced a second
‘specialty’ standard for non-GM canola (CSO1-A). The non-GM CSO1-A canola may
contain up to 0.9 per cent adventitious presence of material from licensed GM crops. The
general standard (CSO1) may contain licenced GM and/or conventional canola. Canola
has been segregated and marketed in line with the two canola standards since 2009 season.
GM Canola: Marketing Issues
ABARE’s research indicates concerns about markets and prices for GM canola are largely
unfounded and that Australian growers could lose significant market share if their access
to GM technology is restricted. There is no credible evidence that international and
domestic markets will be put at risk if Australia grows GM canola. In the traditional
export markets for canola — Japan, Mexico, China, Pakistan and Bangladesh —- GM canola
is generally accepted as readily as non-GM varieties. ABARE’s analysis indicates there
has been no consistent premium paid for Australian non-GM canola once transport
charges have been taken into consideration.
Future Australian exports ofGM ‘Roundup Ready’ and ‘InVigor’ canola to the European
Union are unlikely to face impediments as these varieties have been approved for food and
feed (though not for cultivation) by the European Commission. Barriers affecting
Canadian GM canola grain and meal exports to the European Union have arisen because,
unlike Australia, Canada grows a number of GM canola varieties not approved by the
European Union. In the three years to 2005, over 94 per cent of Australia’s canola exports
went to countries with labelling thresholds for unintended GM presence greater than
5 per cent.
{

Page 88
\
Organics
The ABARE report Potential impacts from the introduction ofGM canola on organic
farming in Australia (2007) predicts that production ofGM canola will have little if any
effect on the organics sector. Organic canola is not grown to any significant extent in
Australia; organic livestock producers can continue to use organic feedstuffs other than
canola meal; and-organic honey is not permitted to be produced from either GM or
conventionally farmed non-GM canola. In the European Union, certified organic products
may contain up to 0.9 per cent by weight of unintended GM presence before losing their
certified organic status.
Herbicide tolerance through conventional breeding
Herbicide tolerant canola has been bred conventionally, for example triazine tolerant (TT)
canola. However, GM breeding techniques offer increased speed and flexibility
introducing new traits. TT canola has been widely adopted in Australia despite inherently
lower yield potential and oil content, associated with photosynthetic capacity. Emergence
of herbicide tolerant weeds is often cited as an issue with GM canola, however it applies
equally to conventionally bred herbicide resistant canola.
GM wheat: Considering the future
No GM wheat has been approved by the Gene Technology Regulator for commercial
production. However, field trials of GM wheat have and are being conducted in Australia,
looking at traits such as starch composition and tolerance of environmental stresses,
including dryness. It is anticipated that the outcomes of Australian R&D will not near
commercialisation for at least seven years.
On 15 May 2009 (Australian time) three grain industry organisations from each of the
United States, Canada and Australia released a joint statement on ‘wheat biotechnology
commercialization’. The Australian organisations were the Grains Council of Australia,
Grain Growers Association and the Pastoralists and Graziers Association of Western
Australia. The statement supported the use of biotechnology in developing improved
wheat varieties and noted that the signatory organisations will work toward the goal of
synchronised commercialisation of biotech traits in wheat in order to minimise market
disruption.
GM FOOD IN AUSTRALIA
Food Safety Assessment and Labelling
All GM foods intended for sale in Australia and New Zealand are subject to a pre-market
safety assessment by Food Standards Australia New Zealand (FSANZ) and approval by
the FSANZ Board. The Australia and New Zealand Food Regulation Ministerial Council
is then notified of the Board’s decision. Gazettal occurs in the Australia New Zealand
Food Standards Code (the Code). More than 40 GM foods have been approved to date.
FSANZ carries out safety assessments on a case-by-case basis, which means each new
genetic modification is assessed individually for its potential impact on the safety of the
food. FSANZ compares the GM food with a similar, commonly eaten non-GM food from
a molecular, toxicological, nutritional and compositional point of view. If the genetic
modification causes an adverse effect in the food, such as increasing its allergenicity or
toxicity, it will not be approved. The safety assessment protocol used by FSANZ for
GM foods is based on internationally recognised principles for assessing the safety of
whole foods.

Page 89
The Code also requires that food (including ingredients, food additives and processing
aids) derived from GM crops be labelled as GM if any genetic material and/or protein
other than that normally present in the food is contained in the final product. Highly
refined foods such as oils and sugars, that do not normally contain any genetic material or
‘
protein, may require labelling if they possess characteristics that are significantly altered
from the non-GM counterpart. This labelling requirement ensures consumers are advised
where there is GM content and can make informed choices.
The Code allows a food to contain up to 10g/kg (1 per cent) unintended new genetic
material and/or protein per ingredient without being labelled but only where the
manufacturer has actively sought to avoid using GM food or ingredients. In addition, food
prepared for immediate consumption, for example at restaurants and through vending
/
machines, is not required to be labelled.
GM soy and corn in infant formula
On 26 September 2010 Greenpeace alleged it had found traces of GM soy and corn in the
popular infant formula 8-26, despite the product not being labelled as containing
GM ingredients. Media reports indicate the test results showed less than 0.1 per cent of
GM content, well below the Australia New Zealand Food Standards Code trigger of
1 per cent before labelling is required. Wyeth Nutrition, the manufacturer of the formula,
released a statement that any contamination was adventitious as the company has a policy
of not using GM ingredients.
Greenpeace and Mothers are Demystifying Genetic Engineering (MADGE) held sit-ins at
two supermarkets,
a Woolworths store in Sydney and a Coles store in Melbourne to
highlight the perceived GM labelling issue. MADGE has indicated it will take further
action 10-16 October 2010. The allegations and sit-ins received significant media
coverage.
On 30 September 2010 Senator Siewert and Senator Xenophon moved that on the next
day of sitting (25 October 2010) that the Senate:
(a) notes recent reports in Australia that found infant formula had been contaminated with
genetically modified (GM) soy and corn;
(b) acknowledges the significant level of community concern about food labelling and
safety issues in Australian food products, particularly those being fed to infants and young
children; and
(c) calls on the Government to introduce clear and effective labelling standards that
_
require all GM additives in Australian food products to be labelled,
NATIONAL ENABLING TECHNOLOGIES STRATEGY
Enabling Technologies Strategy to support the responsible development of enabling technologies,
focusing primarily on biotechnology and nanotechnologies. The Department of Innovation,
Industry, Science and Research is the lead agency. The Strategy’s aim is to improve the
management and regulation of biotechnology and nanotechnology in order to maximise
community confidence and community benefits from the use of new technologies.
In 2010 the department (Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics-
Bureau of Rural Sciences) was provided with $175,000 under the Strategy to investigate
the role of enabling technologies, including biotechnology, in addressing food security and
©
sustainability issues in the agriculture sector.

Page 90
‘
Current as at
7 October 2010
-
SES Lead:
Allen Grant
Agricultural Productivity Division,
Sagt@®)
SES Support:
Matthew Worrell
Research and Development and Food Security, Sega)
ue utintnpninnnncinscnnssnneietnannnatnaennnasineininaininiientesntennmratinnipeaneannnnnenantie