Page 12
GENETICALLY MODIFIED CROPS IN
AUSTRALIA
sl
Current Issue
Genetic modification continues to be contentious in Australia.
Weekly Times reports “GM Canola growing wild in WA town”
[21 September 2011]
Weekly Times “Two charged over Greenpeace raid on GM wheat trial”
[14 September 2011]
« North Queensland Register outlines GM seed spillage issues in West
Australia “GM seed spillage renews calls for ban” (25 August 2011).
e Australian article says “Organic farmer sues over GM taint” (28 July 11).
Talking Points
In Australia, genetically modified organisms and genetically
modified foods are regulated through an integrated legislative
framework.
e The framework is three-tiered: genetically modified crops are
not released to farmers unless they have been assessed as
safe for human health and the environment; genetically
modified foods are not approved for sale unless they have
been assessed as safe; and foods that are approved must be
labelled to allow consumer choice.
e The intentional release of a genetically modified crop into the
Australian environment must be licensed by the Gene
Technology Regulator. The license will only be issued if risks
can be managed so as to protect the health and safety of
people and the environment.
e Economic and marketing considerations such as coexistence
and segregation in agricultural supply chains are addressed
through state specific requirements and industry protocols.
Decisions on whether to allow genetically modified crop
production in part or all of a state or territory are a matter for
thatjurisdiction. Containment, coexistence and segregation are
also managed through state-specific requirements, combined
with industry protocols.
Food Standards Australia New Zealand administers the
PagetofsSStst~=<CSs—‘“SsSsSSSSSS

°
Page 13
regulation and labelling of genetically modified foods and
ingredients and assesses all genetically modified foods for
human consumption on a case by case basis.
e The safety assessment protocol used by Food Standards
Australia New Zealand for genetically modified foods is based
on internationally recognised principles for assessing the safety
of whole foods.
Key Facts
If asked: Wild GM canola found in WA
| am aware there were two genetically modified canola plants found
growing among 190 other stray canola plants on roadsides in
Esperance, Western Australia, in September 2011.
| understand industry has procedures in place for the containment and
transportation of seed including GM canola.
Herbicide tolerant canola plants may be controlled by slashing, grading
or treating with appropriate herbicides.
lItis important to note that before any GM canola is grown in Australia
the Office of the Gene Technology Regulator has found it as safe to
human health and safety and the environment as non GM canola
varieties.
If asked: seed spillage of GM canola in WA
| am aware of the spillage of Roundup Ready GM Canola on the Albany
Highway in south-west Western Australia in August 2011.
| understand that the transport company involved has a well-established
management procedure in place for clean-up of grain spills and that the
Lt
site is being closely monitored.
Herbicides other than Roundup can be effectively used to control any
plants that may germinate. When germination of residual seed became
apparent the transport company coordinated spraying under the
around 8 September. Follow-up spraying is planned as required and the
site is regularly inspected to identify further germination.
lf asked: contamination of organic farm with GM canola in WA
| am aware that there is a legal dispute between two West Australian
farmers over a GM canola crop contaminating an organic farm.
From a national perspective, the Gene Technology Regulator has
approved the commercial release of GM canola.
Decisions to permit genetically modified crop production are a matter for
that jurisdiction. Coexistence and segregation are also managed through
state-specific requirements, combined with industry protocols.
It would be inappropriate for me to comment on any legal action.
_
Page2of5

Page 14
,
lf asked: CSIRO GM wheat trials
e The CSIRO GM wheat field trial was approved in 2009 under strict
containment conditions by the Gene Technology Regulator after
conducting a rigorous science-based risk assessment and extensive
consultation.
This trial is not secret - details, including trial locations, have been
available on the Regulator’s website since 2009.
There has been no breach of containment for any GM wheat trials and
wheat from these trials cannot enter the human or animal food supplies.
To date, there has been no commercial release of GM wheat in
Australia, nor has any application for commercial release been
submitted to the regulator.
e CSIRO has stated it has no immediate plans to conduct human GM
wheat trials and has only sought approval from the Regulator for future
trials if and when they are needed, and that the animal trials are still
continuing.
This research could have positive health impacts not only for the lifestyle
related diseases that affect Australians, but also for developing regions.
|am advised that the incident of vandalism of
a CSIRO GM wheat field
trial is being investigated by the police and the Gene Technology
Regulator and two women have been charged over the incident.
Background
Wild GM canola found
The Conservation Council of Western Australia conducted a small study that found
two GM canola plants of 190 stray canola plants collected along major roadsides
into Esperance, WA’s main GM canola growing region.
Roundup Ready GM canola is one of the three types of herbicide tolerant canola
grown in WA. The other two other types of herbicide tolerant canola grown in WA
are triazine tolerant canola and imidiazoline-tolerant canola. There are both chemical
and physical methods of control of these plants.
e®
Canola plants have been growing on roadsides in Western Australia since 1996, the
year of the first widespread canola plantings. Seeds are accidently dropped on
roadsides during transport of grain. As GM canola is now planted in WA it is not
unexpected that there will be GM canola ‘volunteers’ on roadsides.
University of Melbourne research has shown that roadside canola plants do not
generally persist for more than one year.
There is no scientifically substantiated evidence of harm to people from GM canola
approved by the Regulator.
GM Canola Spillage
About 15 tonnes of GM canola was spilt near the West Australian town of Williams
on 11 August 2011.
The grain handler Co-operative Bulk Handling (CBH) has advised that the canola
seed, gravel and top soil from the surrounding area has been removed. The handler
site to mitigate any risk of contamination to surrounding areas.
"
Page3 of 5

Page 15
Roundup Ready canola is not resistant to other herbicides used for control of broad
leaf weeds.
The site of the accident is 100 km north of the organic farm involved in the legal
dispute over GM contamination, and is within a zone of 12 grain growers who have
declared themselves ‘GM-free’.
GM Liability issues
A Statutory Review of the Gene Technology Act 2000 was conducted in 2005. The
review considered issues such as strict liability for contamination and concluded that
specific provisions should not be introduced on strict liability, compensation funds,
mandatory insurance and third party appeals.
The Statutory Review recommended that the Act should be reviewed every five
years. The Department of Health and Ageing is currently conducting a review
of the Act to ensure that it continues to accommodate emerging trends.
*
State reviews of genetically modified crop legislation concluded that liability
concerns can be adequately dealt with through common law and consumer
protection legislation and therefore there is no need for additional liability measures
to be put in place.
Greenpeace and the CSIRO GM wheat trials
CSIRO have been conducting small contained trials of GM wheat with different traits
since 2005. These trials are restricted in size and duration and crops from the trials
are not permitted to enter the human or animal food supply.
*
Two NSW women have been summonsed to appear in the ACT Magistrates Court
charged with a number of offences. Including trespass and damaging
Commonwealth property.
The women are alleged to have entered a trial site in Ginninderra, Canberra and
destroyed the 0.5ha trial plot with a whipper-snipper.
FOI request from Greenpeace to the CSIRO
Media reports that in May 2011, Greenpeace lodged an FOI request with CSIRO for
all documents relating to nutritional testing CSIRO had conducted, or will conduct,
on pigs, rats or humans, with food produced using GM.
Having identified 1042 related documents, CSIRO denied the request, citing the
539 hours required to process them as unreasonably resource intensive and not in
the public interest. CSIRO suggested the request be modified to exclude documents
relating to a project being undertaken on a commercial footing.
GM foods
47 genetically modified foods have been approved to date.
Food Standards Australia New Zealand will not approve a genetically modified food
for sale or use if there is evidence it would pose a risk to public health and safety.
Foods from approved genetically modified crops have been consumed since
genetically modified crops were first grown commercially in six countries in 1996,
including the United States.
Scientific evidence indicates that feeding genetically modified plant material to
livestock does not affect the nutritional value or safety of the meat, milk and eggs
derived from those animals. As these food products are not genetically modified,
they are not required to be labelled as such.
Genetically modified foods are required to be labelled in accordance with the
Australia New Zealand Food Standards Code, enabling consumers to make
informed choices about what they eat.
Page 4 of §

Page 16
GM crops
The Minister
forHealth and Ageing, the Hon. Nicola Roxon MP, has the lead
organisms and genetically modified foods.
The Gene Technology Regulator is an independent statutory office holder in
the Health Portfolio, responsible for the Gene Technology Act 2000.
The Regulator has approved the commercial release of several varieties of cotton,
canola, carnations and a rose; and has issued licences for field trials of crops as
diverse as banana, sugarcane, wheat and barley, pineapple, papaya, white clover
and grapevines, as well as the ornamental plant, torenia.
In 2011, 700 000 hectares of genetically modified canola and cotton was planted in
Australia. 2010 was the third year genetically modified canola could be grown
{
commercially in New South Wales (24 040 hectares) and Victoria (36 500 hectares).
It was the first year genetically modified canola could be grown commercially in
Western Australia (72 790 hectares).
Tasmania has a moratorium on the commercial release of genetically modified
moratorium on genetically modified food crops until 2019.
Potential benefits of GM
Biotechnology, including the development of genetically modified crops, can assist in
increasing agricultural productivity in the face of climate change, resource
constraints and the pressures of providing a secure food supply.
Genetically modified crops can benefit the environment by changing the way farmers
manage their crops.
ABARES released two reports in 2008 which found that genetic modification of crops
is delivering significant cost savings to farmers in other countries.
Australian growers could lose significant market share if their access to genetically
modified crop technology is restricted.
FOI request from Greenpeace to DAFF
On5
request from Greenpeace seeking all documents pertaining to ‘the development of
{
salinity and drought-tolerant genetically modified wheat in Australia’.
The department is responding to this request and have sent the applicant a notice of
estimated charges.
Contact Officer:
Leanne Hodge
SES Officer:
Michael Ryan
Telephone:
Telephone:
mo
Page 5 of 5
44-2