1
Page 57
GENETICALLY MODIFIED CROPS IN AUSTRALIA
Current Issue
'
What is the government doing to ensure genetically modified crops andfoods
\
are safe?
Talking Points
In Australia, genetically modified organisms and genetically modified foods are
regulated through an integrated legislative framework.
The framework requires that: genetically modified crops are not released to
farmers unless they have been assessed as safe for human health and the
environment; genetically modified foods are not approved for sale unless they
have been assessed as safe; foods that are approved must be labelled to allow
consumer choice.
The intentional release of a genetically modified crop into the Australian
environment must be licensed by the Gene Technology Regulator,
an independent statutory office holder in the Health portfolio responsible for
administering and enforcing the Gene Technology Act 2000. The license will
only be issued if risks can be managed so as to protect the health and safety of
people and the environment.
Economic and marketing considerations such as coexistence and segregation in
agricultural supply chains are addressed through state specific requirements and
industry protocols.
.
Decisions on whether to allow genetically modified crop production in part or
all of a state or territory are a matter for that jurisdiction.
Food Standards Australia New Zealand administers the regulation and labelling
of genetically modified foods and ingredients and assesses all genetically
modified foods for human consumption on a case by case basis.
TOE
7

ree
e The safety assessment protocol used by Food Standards Australia New Zealand
for genetically modified foods is based on internationally recognised principles
for assessing the safety of whole foods.
Additional Key Facts
The Minister for Health and Ageing, the Hon. Nicola Roxon MP, has the lead
organisms and genetically modified foods.
- The Gene Technology Regulator is an independent statutory office holder in
the Health portfolio responsible for administering and enforcing the Gene
Technology Act 2000.
e The Gene Technology Regulator has approved the commercial release of
several varieties of cotton, canola, carnations and a rose; and has issued licences
for field trials of crops as diverse as sugarcane, wheat and barley, pineapple,
white clover and grapevines, as well as the ornamental plant, torenia.
IF ASKED: CSIRO GM wheat trials
- CSIRO has been licensed by the Regulator to trial a number ofGM wheat
and barley plants. The availability ofthese plants to be used as commercial
crops is dependent on the research results, and further regulatory approval
which is the responsibility ofthe Regulator.
Lam aware that Greenpeace has raised concerns over the potential impacts
GM wheat may have on human health.
- CSIRO has stated it has no immediate plans to conduct human GM wheat
trials and has only sought approval from the Regulator for future trials ifand
when they are needed, and that the animal trials are still continuing.
¢ In 2010, nearly 133,330 hectares of genetically modified canola was planted in
Australia. 2010 was the third year genetically modified canola could be grown
oe
Page 2 of4

Page 59
commercially in New South Wales (24,040 hectares) and Victoria
:
(36,500 hectares). It was the first year genetically modified canola could be
grown commercially in Western Australia (72,790 hectares).
L
Tasmania has a moratorium on the commercial release of genetically modified
moratorium on genetically modified food crops indefinitely.
Food Standards Australia New Zealand will not approve a genetically modified
food for sale or use if there is evidence it would pose public health and safety
concerns. More than 40 genetically modified foods have been approved to date.
«
Foods from approved genetically modified crops have been consumed since
genetically modified crops were first grown commercially in six countries in
1996, including the United States.
Scientific evidence indicates that feeding genetically modified plant material to
livestock does not affect the nutritional value or safety of the meat, milk and
eggs derived from those animals. As these food products
are not genetically
modified, they are not required to be labelled as genetically modified.
Genetically modified foods are required to be labelled in accordance with the
Australia New Zealand Food Standards Code, enabling consumers to make
informed choices about what they eat.
Biotechnology, including the development of genetically modified crops, can
assist in increasing agricultural productivity in the face of climate change,
resource constraints and the pressures of providing a secure food supply.
Genetically modified crops can benefit the environment by changing the way
farmers manage their crops.
ABAREs released two reports in 2008 which found that genetic modification of
crops is delivering significant cost savings to farmers in other countries.
~~
°
~~
Pagesofd
—_
~

mee
e Australian growers could lose significant market share iftheir access to
genetically modified crop technology is restricted.
The debate regarding liability associated with genetically modified crops in
Australia is not new. During development ofthe Gene Technology Bill 2000
(Commonwealth), submissions were received from interested parties seeking
the imposition of strict liability for damage caused by genetically modified
organisms; and also seeking that compensation be established to protect victims
of genetic contamination.
e A Statutory Review of the Gene Technology Act 2000 was conducted in 2005.
The review concluded that the object of the Act.(to protect the health and safety
of people and to protect the environment, by identifying risks posed by or as a
result of gene technology, and by managing those risks through regulating
certain dealings with Genetically Modified Organisms) was being achieved.
In assessing whether the object of the Act was being achieved, the review
considered issues such as the introduction of strict liability for contamination
and concluded that specific provisions should not be introduced on strict
liability, compensation funds, mandatory insurance and third party appeals.
- The Statutory Review recommended that the Act should be reviewed every
five years. The Department of Health and Ageing is currently conducting a
review ofthe Act to ensure that it continues to accommodate emerging trends.
State reviews of genetically modified crop moratorium legislation concluded
that liability concerns can be adequately dealt with through common law and
consumer protection legislation and therefore there is no need for additional
liability measures to be put in place.
Contact Officer:
Michael Ryan
SES Officer:
Michael Ryan
Telephone:
Telephone:
Pagedod