Pesos?
GENETICALLY MODIFIED CROPS IN AUSTRALIA
QUESTION
;
What is the Government response to reports that companies promoting the
use of genetically modified crops taking over Australian wheat reseach; and
what measures will the government implement to ensure safety of Australian
crops from genetically modified grains and other foods?
TALKING POINTS
In Australia gene technology is regulated under a nationally consistent
regulatory scheme by the Gene Technology Regulator in accordance with the
Gene Technology Act 2000. The Regulator has approved commercial release
of several varieties of cotton, canola, carnations and a rose; and has issued
licences for field trials of crops as diverse as sugarcane, wheat and barley,
pineapple, white clover and grapevines, as well as the ornamental plant,
torenia.
Decisions on whether to allow genetically modified crop production in part or
all of a state or territory are a matter for that jurisdiction.
In 2010, nearly 133,330 hectares of genetically modified canola was planted
in Australia. This is the third year genetically modified canola could be grown
commercially in New South Wales (24,040 hectares) and Victoria
(36,500 hectares). It is the first year genetically modified canola could be
grown commercially in Western Australia (72,790 hectares).
Tasmania has a moratorium on the commercial release ofgenetically
extended its moratorium on genetically modified food crops indefinitely.
»
Food Standards Australia New Zealand administers the regulation and
labelling ofgenetically modified foods and ingredients and assesses all
genetically modified foods for human consumption on a case by case basis.
Page | of4
SES Officer;

resess
Food Standards Australia New Zealand compares the genetically modified
food with a similar, commonly eaten non-genetically modified food from a
molecular, toxicological, nutritional and compositional point ofview. Ifthe
genetic modification causes an adverse effect, such as increasing a food’s
_
allergenicity or toxicity, it will not be approved. The safety assessment
protocol used by Food Standards Australia New Zealand for genetically
modified foods is based on internationally recognised principles for assessing
the safety ofwhole foods.
«
More than 40 genetically modified foods have been approved. Food Standards
Australia New Zealand will not approve a genetically modified food for sale
or use if there is evidence it would pose public health and safety concerns.
Genetically modified foods are required to be labelled in accordance with the
Australia New Zealand Food Standards Code, enabling consumers to make
informed choices about what they eat.
+
Scientific evidence indicates that feeding genetically modified plant material
to livestock does not affect the nutritional value or safety of the meat, milk
and eggs derived from those animals. As these food products are not
genetically modified, they are not required to be labelled as genetically
modified.
FURTHER TALKING POINTS
Biotechnology, including the development of genetically modified crops, can
assist in increasing agricultural productivity in the face of climate change,
resource constraints and the pressures ofproviding a secure food supply.
Foods from approved genetically modified crops have been consumed since
genetically modified crops were first grown commercially in six countries in
1996, including the United States.
Page 2 of4|

mee
 ABARE released two reports in 2008 which found that genetic modification
of crops is delivering significant cost savings to farmers in other countries.
Australian growers could lose significant market share iftheir access to
genetically modified crop technology is restricted.
Genetically modified crops can benefit the environment by changing the way
farmers manage their crops.
The intentional release of a genetically modified organism into the Australian
environment, such as a genetically modified crop, must be licensed by the
Gene Technology Regulator, an independent statutory office holder within the
Health portfolio. The license will only be issued if risks can be managed so as
to protect the health and safety ofpeople and the environment.
BACKGROUND
Concerns with genetically modified crops and food raised by the farming and
general community often relate to: the adequacy of Australia’s regulatory and
food labelling systems; environmental impacts, loss ofmarket access; impact
on organic crop production; legal liability to farmers ofnon-genetically
modified crops and technology providers; and the capture of the Australian
agricultural sector by multi-nationals.
The Minister for Health and Ageing, the Hon. Nicola Roxon MP has the lead
modified organisms and genetically modified foods.
Page 3 of 4

Page 40
Last Updated: 27 October 2610
FURTHER INFORMATION —- NOT FOR PUBLIC RELEASE
In late September 2010 Greenpeace and the media reported trace amounts of genetically
modified soy and corn had been found in S-26 Soy infant formula, despite the product not being
labelled as containing genetically modified ingredients. Following these reports, Senator Siewert
and Senator Xenophon moved to discuss the labelling of genetically modified foods when the
a
Senate next sits (25 October 2010).
On 27 October 2010 the Herald Sun reported that a Greenpeace report would be released on
Spliced Bread: the Threat ofGenetically Engineered Wheat in Australia. The report is
embargoed until 7:30pm 27 October 2010. According to press reports, Greenpeace claims
genetic modification companies have ‘taken over’ Australian wheat research; grain handlers
wield too much power to make decisions about genetically modified wheat; genetically modified
\
crops perform no better than conventional ones; Australian wheat growers will lose market share
by surrendering their non genetically modified status; and studies on the long-term effects of
'
genetically modified foods on animals show adverse health effects. Greenpeace are also
concerned at the lack of testing on humans.
InterGrain Pty Ltd evolved from the wheat and barley breeding programs which were previously
the Grains Research & Development Corporation. Monsanto acquired a 19.9 per cent stake in
InterGrain in August 2010.
‘
Page 4 of 4