2003. State/territory governments determine whether licensed crops can be grown in
system, with all grain delivered to five nominated delivery sites (three of which were
In 2009, around 300 growers planted over 40,000 hectares of GM canola in Victoria
Growers are required by Monsanto to undertake stewardship training before they can
purchase seed. Objectives of the stewardship training include optimising agronomic
single crop and only during the 2008 calendar year, and forbade saving any seed for
manage the risk of herbicide resistance in weeds. GM canola growers must practice
development of industry specific, market-driven strategies based on the principle of
industry management overseen by government for those states that have endorsed the
point of bulk storage. A final report, which includes details of the subsequent handling
and processing ofthe grain, will be submitted to the PISC IDC in February 2010, The
report indicates that the market choice protocols adopted by industry in 2008 were
The grains industry believes it has the capacity to manage the commercialisation of

The Australian canola industry has historically had one grade of canola. Following the
Victoria, the Australian Oilseeds Federation and Grain Trade Australia introduced a
From 2009 and beyond, canola will be segregated and marketed in line with the two
want to deliver into the non-GM CSO1-A canola segregation will not have to pay for
additional tests to prove their crops are not genetically modified, despite initial media
reports that farmers could be charged around $2.50 per tonne. Not all receival sites
research sites, covering 854 hectares. The aim of the trials was to test that both GM
and non-GM canola can be transported, handled and exported as separate grains. On
The issue ofFusarium build-up in soils when glyphosate herbicide is used has been
raised in Ministerial correspondence (McGauran and Burke). This matter is relevant
specifically. APVMA’s CEO has said that there is currently no evidence glyphosate
causes increased attacks from soil pathogens such as Fusarium in GM or conventional
crops. DEWHA has conducteda literature search on this issue, noting that in Canada,
occurred and that due to binding of glyphosate to soil particles, there is little effect of
Further questions on Fusarium should be addressed either to the Department of the
Herbicide tolerant canola has been bred conventionally, for example triazine tolerant
in Australia despite inherently lower yield potential and oil content, associated with
photosynthetic capacity. Emergence of herbicide tolerant weeds is an issue with TT
largely unfounded and that Australian growers could lose significant market share if
international and domestic markets will be put at risk if Australia grows GM canola.
In the traditional export markets for canola — Japan, Mexico, China, Pakistan and

ABARE’s analysis indicates there has been no consistent premium paid for Australian
approved for food and feed (though not for cultivation) by the European Commission.
Barriers affecting Canadian GM canola grain and meal exports to the European Union
have arisen because, unlike Australia, Canada grows a number of GM canola varieties
In the three years to 2005, over 94 per cent of Australia’s canola exports went to
Preservation (2006) that if all identity preservation costs were attributed to non-GM
production of GM canola will have little if any effect on the organics sector. Organic
canola is not grown to any significant extent in Australia; organic livestock producers
can continue to use organic feedstuffs other than canola meal; and organic honey is
canola, In the European Union, certified organic products may contain up to 0.9 per
cent by weight of unintended GM presence before losing their certified organic status.
Detailed questions about market acceptance and prices should be referred to ABARE.
Australia, looking at traits such as starch composition and tolerance of environmental
stresses, including dryness. It is anticipated that the outcomes of Australian R&D will
On 15 May 2009 (Australian time) three grain industry organisations from each of the
biotechnology in developing improved wheat varieties and noted that the signatory
organisations will work toward the goal of synchronised commercialisation of biotech