The Australian Government seeks to ensure that an appropriate balance exists between incentives for
innovation and investment and the interests of both individuals and businesses, including small
businesses, in accessing ideas and products.
Productivity Commission, IP Arrangements Issues Paper, 2015
Review
In 2017, the department commissioned ACIL Allen Consulting Pty Ltd to research and review
intellectual property (IP) arrangements associated with regulation of agricultural and veterinary (agvet)
chemical products in selected countries, and to compare those IP arrangements with the Australian
system.
The aim of this project was to provide the department with a better understanding of the regulatory
arrangements in place in certain comparable nations to encourage both registration of new agvet
chemical products and access to generic products.
Outcome
In summary, the ACIL Allen review found that Australia's data protection (and IP settings more
broadly) are generally appropriate, competitive and do not pose barriers to agvet chemical product
registration.
However, the report also found there is scope to improve the efficiency of the current agvet chemical
registration process, and for the APVMA to make greater use of international data and assessments as
part of improving that process. The department and the APVMA are currently addressing these issues
through the development of various legislative and operational changes.
With respect to the access problem of ‘minor use’, the report suggests that Australia’s national grants
program (which is based on the Canadian minor use program) should carry on in conjunction with the
APVMA continuing to fast-track its product registrations and use permits. The report also suggested
that another Canadian policy of limiting manufacturer liability be considered as a possible option for
Australia and this idea is also being explored.
Finally, the report suggests that Australian legislation surrounding agvet chemicals and intellectual
property protection could benefit from being simplified and modernised.
Intellectual property (IP) and agvet chemicals
Sometimes agricultural producers cannot purchase agvet chemicals when they need them because a
new chemical has not been registered in Australia by the owner for a particular use or volume. Not
registering particular chemicals or product uses is a commercial decision based on the cost of their
registration and the likely returns in a small market. When this occurs, producers in other markets will

gain a trading advantage if they gain access to those newer chemicals before their Australian
counterparts.
The agvet chemical sector relies heavily on data protection rights since many advances in chemistry
require a large upfront R&D investment and are easy to copy. Any ability of agvet chemical companies
to leverage IP rights to forestall market entry by generics (effectively extending the term of their
exclusivity) has a significant negative impact on Australian farmers and other users in terms of choice
and price as well as on taxpayers (e.g. through a compensating need to deliver grants programs or
subsidies etc.).
In November 2016, the department began to examine how to encourage access to generic products
while simultaneously facilitating the emergence of new chemistries, and whether this could be done
through reforms to intellectual property (IP), data protection, and confidential commercial information
settings. The department commissioned the ACIL Allen review of international IP arrangements and
comparison with the Australian regulatory environment as an initial step in a longer-term research
project.
IP in brief
Intellectual property (IP) rights take a variety of forms including patents, copyright and trademarks and
others such as rights over plant varieties, and a single product can embody multiple IP rights. IP
arrangements also form part of the broader innovation system and the role they play depends on the
right that is afforded. Patents and copyright help promote product innovation and trademarks provide
consumer information and protect brand reputation.
Australia is also overwhelmingly a net importer of IP, which means that the costs to consumers and
follow-on innovators from higher prices and restricted availability are not offset by increases in
Australian producer profits.
Sound IP arrangements offer opportunities to creators to secure sufficient returns to justify their
investment. In this way ideas are like property rights but they also deliver economic and social value as
others seek to use them and extend knowledge. For such reasons, IP rights are not granted in
perpetuity, and strict limitations are placed on their application.
Some information on this page has been taken from the 2016 Productivity Commission inquiry report,
No. 78, Intellectual Property Arrangements.
Review criteria:
In undertaking the review, ACIL Allen was asked to deliver a report that:
Proposed policy options to improve Australian agricultural producers’ access, through
registration by the APVMA, to innovative agvet chemicals while also supporting access to generic
agvet chemicals. This is to include a robust and evidence-based analysis of policy options.
•

Included supporting background and analysis, primarily based on desk-top research using
national and international sources, as well as stakeholder consultations.
In the context of the registration process for both new and generic agvet chemical products in
Australia, the UK, EU, the USA, Canada and New Zealand, documented and compared the
supporting primary and subordinate IP legislation, including the provision and trade obligations
around: 
Patents
Data protection
Considered the use and management of confidential commercial information by agvet regulatory
bodies, and anything else important for understanding the IP environment.
Overviewed the national registration arrangements for both new and generic agvet chemical
products for the selected countries, including the costs and timeframes involved for applicants,
protocols/protections on the use and management of confidential commercial information,
references to overseas registration processes, recent reforms and the direction of future reforms.
For selected countries, explained the characteristics and unique features of the agvet chemical
markets in which these regulators operate, including any market incentives/strategic behaviours
fostered by IP settings, and how these have affected the registration rates of both new and generic
agvet chemical products over recent years.
For comparison purposes, reviewed and provided a summary of the available literature on the
registration arrangements and supporting IP schemes in those same set of countries for human
therapeutic (pharmaceutical) products.
Developed policy options extending to consideration of changes to improve incentives to register
agvet chemicals for minor uses.
Download
If you have difficulty accessing these files, please visit web accessibility.
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/farm-food-drought/ag-vet-chemicals/better-regulation-of-ag-vet-
chemicals/streamlining/review-international-ip
• 
• 
◦ 
◦ 
• 
• 
• 
• 
•