EVE enables approved arrangement class 19 accredited persons to view electronic government certificates (eCertificates) and relevant attachments online as part of document assessment for imported goods.
This system improvement is in line with the department’s commitment to adopt paperless import clearance processes and compliance to international standards. It enables self-service, supporting faster document assessment clearance times and a better user experience.
When will EVE be available?
EVE will be available to approved arrangement class 19.2 accredited persons, from the end of June 2024,
Who can use EVE?
Approved arrangement class 19.2 accredited persons.
How to access EVE?
To be able to view eCertificates through EVE, you will need to:
- be accredited under approved arrangement class 19.2
- sign up through a web link we will email to your approved arrangement class 19 registered email address
- install the latest version of a multi-factor authentication (MFA) app on your mobile phone to help you sign in securely
- use a web browser to access the Biosecurity Client Portal (https://biosecurity.awe.gov.au/).
What can EVE do?
With EVE, approved arrangement class 19.2 approved persons can view digital copies of government certificates (eCertificates) online.
You can search for a certificate using criteria, originating country and certificate number. The page will then return the eCertificate and any attachments (if applicable) as image files.
eCertificates are currently only supported for certain trading partner countries. As this government-to-government exchange grows, the number of eCertificates accessible through EVE will also grow. To view a list of currently supported trading partners, see eCert (electronic certification) for imports.
Further information
For more information or support, please email class19@aff.gov.au with “EVE” in the subject field.
EVE is a part of the Simplified Targeting and Enhanced Processing Systems (STEPS) program – an investment in the department’s imported cargo clearance systems.