Animal Health 2011-2015 (AIP-EID Phase I)

Phase I of the Australia Indonesia Partnership for Emerging Infectious Diseases Animal Health

2011-2015 (AIP-EID) was successfully completed on 30 June 2015. The Program was implemented in

Agriculture. The Program strengthened Indonesia’s veterinary services across a range of technical and

policy areas, at both central and sub-national levels.

The Achievements of the AIP-EID Animal Health Program 2011-2015 provides further details on the

Program’s successes from Phase I.

Download

Document

Pages File size

Achievements of the AIP-EID Animal Health Program 2011-2015 PDF

28

1.0 MB

Achievements of the AIP-EID Animal Health Program 2011-2015 DOCX

28

3.0 MB

Animal Health 2015-2018 (AIP-EID Phase II)

An extension of the AIP-EID Program has been approved after the success of the first phase. The

extension of the AIP-EID Program will further build upon achievements made since 2011 and continue

to assist in strengthening Indonesia’s veterinary services. Phase II of the Program adopts the One

Health approach by working synergistically in both the animal and human health sectors and the

Organization (WHO), continuing to implement the Program in partnership with their respective

delivering the Human Health Program with shared high level program outcomes, which have been

identified as:

Strengthened Indonesian government systems for integrated preparedness and rapid response to

animal health and public health emergencies.

Strengthened Indonesian government animal health information system and public health

surveillance systems, and the effective use of information.

Enhanced institutional and individual performance in leadership, management and evidence-

based decision-making.

• 

• 

•

component outcomes include:

Strengthened emergency management.

Enhanced national animal health information system (iSIKHNAS) and the effective use of

information to support surveillance, veterinary service delivery, policy development and

advocacy.

Strengthened leadership and management within Indonesia’s Veterinary Service.

Phase II of the Program will commence on 1 July 2015 and finish on 30 June 2018.

Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/animal/health/emerging-infectious-diseases

• 

• 

•