DAFF job no. 950573
Biotechnology
briefs
What are the challenges and opportunities 
for the Australian oilseed industry?
Challenges that the industry may need to face, include:
• 	 the impact of climate change, especially drought
• 	 new varieties of palm and soybeans, providing oils 
which are widely and cheaply available and are of 
similar quality to the more expensive Australian 
canola oil.
Current opportunities include the chance 
to:
• 	 further benefit the wheat industry by increasing the 
use of oilseed crops in rotation cycles
•	 supply more local oilseed meal to the growing 
stockfeed industry
•	 develop stable oils for frying that could compete 
with palm and soybean imports
•	 develop value-added oils such as health-giving long-
chain omega-3 fatty acids
•	 create a niche market for oilseed crops containing 
omega-3 oils 
•	 produce high volumes of oils for biodiesel 
production.
How do I find out more?
This brochure is one in a series of Biotechnology briefs 
presenting summaries of key reports on biotechnology 
and Australian agriculture.
More information is available in the report:
Holtzapffel R., Johnson H. and Mewett O. 2007, GM oilseed 
crops and the Australian oilseed industry, Australian 
Government Bureau of Rural Sciences, Canberra.
How can I get copies?
For hard copies of these and other DAFF publications 
please email: agbiotech@daff.gov.au
Visit the Australian Government Department of 
Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry website for regular 
updates and information on agricultural biotechnology:
www.daff.gov.au/agriculture-food/biotechnology
‘We want to ensure that developments in 
biotechnology are captured for the benefit of the 
Australian community, industry and the environment, 
while safeguarding human health and ensuring 
environmental protection.’
GM oilseed crops and 
the Australian oilseed 
industry
Other titles in this series?
Biotechnology briefs: GM grains in Australia - Identity 
preservation
Biotechnology briefs: Market acceptance of GM canola
Biotechnology briefs: GM canola - Potential impacts on 
organic farming in Australia
The Australian Government’s National Biotechnology 
Strategy funded the production of these reports and 
brochures.  
DAFF job no. 950573
Photo courtesy of CSIRO

International competion in the oilseed market is very 
strong and influences the returns for our canola exports. 
Currently genetically modified (GM) oilseeds are being 
grown overseas at an increasing rate, but in Australia 
only GM cotton is grown commercially. Because 
competitor countries are growing GM oilseed crops 
widely, many people are predicting that the Australian 
industry will struggle over the next 5–10 years. 
Experts believe that the introduction of GM canola 
could enhance the competitive advantage of our 
oilseeds and assist the oilseed industry to remain 
viable and competitive in the future. It would bring a 
range of benefits for farmers, such as improved yields, 
decreased use of herbicides and improved options for 
weed management.  Consumers too would benefit from 
enhanced nutritional value, for example ‘healthier’ fats. 
What are oilseed crops?
These are crops grown for their oil, which is widely used 
by both consumers and industry. Australia produces 
between 2 and 3 million tonnes of oilseeds each year, 
with canola and cottonseed accounting for 92% of 
our total oilseed production. Peanuts, soybeans and 
sunflower seeds account for the remaining 8%. Cotton is 
primarily a fibre crop; however it is often included as an 
‘oilseed’ as cottonseed can be crushed for oil.
What are oilseeds used for?
Oilseeds have a wide range of uses. We use vegetable 
oils widely for frying, in processed food and for the 
manufacture of margarine. Meal derived from oilseeds is 
an important source of protein and oil in the stockfeed 
industry. Oilseeds also have non-food uses, including 
industrial applications such as manufacture of soaps, 
lubricants and paint.
How important is this industry to Australian 
agriculture? 
The gross value of oilseed production averaged 
$766 million over the three years to 2005–06. This is 
around 7% of the total gross value of Australian grain 
production.  
Oilseeds, in particular canola, can have an even more 
important role in Australian agriculture. They are used 
as a vital rotation crop, to increase the productivity 
of wheat and barley crops that follow in the cropping 
cycle. These oilseed crops help with disease and weed 
management for our main export grains.
Do we grow genetically modified oilseed in 
Australia?
In Australia, we are currently growing genetically 
modified (GM) varieties of cotton, which are both 
herbicide tolerant and insect resistant. 
In 2003, the Gene Technology Regulator approved 
two varieties of GM canola for commercial release in 
Australia. However, a number of concerns related to 
marketing have meant that the main canola-producing 
states in Australia have put in place legislation 
preventing commercial plantings of GM canola.
What about overseas?
Overseas countries have approved the commercial 
release of a number of GM oilseed crops. For example, 
cotton, canola and soybean varieties are grown with 
herbicide tolerance and/or insect resistance. The 
widespread production and introduction of GM oilseed 
crops overseas is likely to continue.
What does this mean for the Australian 
oilseed industry?
Because competitor countries are growing GM oilseed 
crops, many people are predicting that the Australian 
industry will struggle over the next 5–10 years. Experts 
believe that one option that could assist our oilseed 
industry to remain viable and competitive in the future 
is access to GM technology.
What are farmers’ experiences with GM 
oilseed crops?
Both farmers and the environment have benefited from 
the adoption of GM cotton in Australia and GM cotton, 
soybeans and canola overseas. 
In Australia, GM insect resistant cotton led to an 
impressive 75% reduction in associated insecticide use in 
the 2004–05 growing season.
Overseas studies show net economic benefits for many 
farmers growing GM crops. The adoption of GM canola 
in Canada, for example, has led to:
•	 improved yields
•	 decreased use of herbicides 
•	 improved options for weed management 
• 	 easier adoption of minimum and no-till cultivation 
practices.
Canadian growers have retained their share of the main 
export markets, despite the majority of their canola crop 
now being GM varieties.
What are the latest developments in GM 
oilseeds?
Australian research is developing crops that produce 
healthier oils. Scientists are improving the nutritional 
value of our oilseed crops by:
• 	 improving the fatty acid profiles (e.g. high oleic and/
or low linoleic acid levels)
• 	 developing novel fatty acid compositions (e.g. long 
chain omega-3 fatty acids)
Current research overseas is investigating ways in which 
to produce GM oilseed crops with the following features:
• 	 increased essential amino acid content (e.g. 
methionine and lysine)
• 	 precursors of essential vitamins (e.g. Vitamin A and E)
• 	 increased nutritional value for stockfeed (e.g. by 
reducing anti-nutritional compounds such as phytic 
acid)
• 	 opportunities for the development of 
pharmaceutical and industrial products (e.g. plant-
made vaccines or bioplastics). 
• 	 lower levels of compounds that cause allergic 
reactions. 
In addition to increasing the health benefits for people 
and animals, new modifications will improve agronomic 
performance and increase profits for grain growers.  The 
new varieties might provide:
•	 increased yields
• 	 improved tolerance of environmental stress
• 	 improved disease resistance
• 	 more efficient nitrogen use
• 	 increased seed size, yield and oil content
• 	 reduced pod shatter.