Sampling Plan and Test Protocol for the Semiquantitative
Detection of Genetically Modified Canola (Brassica napus) Seed
in Bulk Canola Seed
KERRY R. EMSLIE,* LEE WHAITES, KATE R. GRIFFITHS, AND E. JOHN MURBY
National Measurement Institute, P.O. Box 385, Pymble, New South Wales, 2073 Australia
Using a statistical approach, sampling plans for the semiquantitative detection of genetically modified
(GM) canola within a bulk seed sample can be developed and tailored to meet different GM thresholds,
costs, and confidence limits. This is achieved by changing the number of subsamples analyzed, the
number of seeds per subsample, and the percentage of positive results allowed. These sampling
plans must be devised carefully, taking into account the detection capability of the analytical assay.
This is particularly important in the case of InVigor (a registered trademark of Bayer CropScience)
canola, for which expression levels of the introduced protein in seed are very low. Lateral flow assays
and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA) were both investigated for their suitability as a
qualitative assay using a subsampling approach. On the basis of an ELISA, several sampling plans
have been devised and validated to provide at least 99% confidence that bulk seed samples containing
at least 0.9% (w/w) InVigor canola will be detected. Although the term “seed” is used throughout this
paper to refer to the canola, the term “seed” is to be taken to include both seed and the canola seed
(grain) that is harvested by the farmer/grower.
KEYWORDS: Brassica napus; canola; confidence; genetically modified organisms; GMO; immunoassay;
InVigor canola; seed; semiquantitative; threshold
INTRODUCTION
In recognition that comingling of genetically modified (GM)
and non-GM seed along the supply chain is difficult to avoid
completely, several countries and the European Union have
implemented threshold levels for allowable GM contamination
in non-GM seed lots. Such threshold levels generally apply only
to GM events that have been approved for release within the
relevant country. In Australia, several GM canola events have
been approved for commercial release by the regulating body,
the Office of the Gene Technology Regulator (OGTR). In late
2005, the Primary Industries Ministerial Council of Australia
agreed to adopt a threshold level for labeling of canola grain
and seed approved by the OGTR (http://www.maff.gov.au/
releases/05/pimc9.html). The threshold level was set, in the first
instance, at 0.9% GM seed for canola crop and 0.5% GM seed
for commercial seed for sowing.
The standard process to monitor for the adventitious presence
(AP) of GM canola in a seed lot involves collection of several
primary samples using established sampling procedures, which
take into consideration the likely heterogeneity of GM material
in the sample (1-3). The primary samples are then combined
and mixed to form a composite sample that is representative of
the whole seed lot (3). The composite sample is reduced in size,
through the use of mixers and dividers, such as a riffle box,
into one or more working samples that are analyzed using the
chosen test method. The percentage of GM seed in a working
sample can be estimated using a quantitative analysis such as
real-time Polymerase Chain Reaction (4). As there will be an
error associated with the sampling process, it is unlikely that
the percentage of GM seed in such a working sample will
correspond exactly to that in the composite sample. Hence, the
uncertainty associated with the sampling process must be
considered together with the uncertainty of the analytical method
when the level of confidence associated with an estimate of
the percentage of GM in the composite sample is determined
(3, 5).
Alternatively, a statistical approach can be used which is
based on the assumption that the number of GM seeds present
in any working sample taken from a homogeneous composite
sample follows a binomial distribution. In this case, the
minimum number of seeds that must be analyzed to have a
defined level of confidence that at least one of those seeds would
be GM if the composite sample exceeds the desired threshold
level for GM contamination is determined (6, 7). A qualitative
analysis can then be conducted on such a working sample, and
a positive result would indicate with the defined level of
confidence that the composite sample exceeds the threshold
level. Using this semiquantitative approach, the size and number
of working samples will depend on the capabilities and detection
limit of the chosen analytical assay, the acceptable threshold
level, and the level of confidence desired in the result.
* Corresponding author (telephone +61 2 9449 0141; fax +61 2 9449
1653; e-mail kerry.emslie@measurement.gov.au).
10.1021/jf070267i CCC: $37.00
Published xxxx by the American Chemical Society
PAGE EST: 7.7
Published on Web 05/08/2007

The simplest semiquantitative approach aims only to ensure
that specified levels of GM material are not exceeded and does
not accommodate the situation when very low levels of AP may
be acceptable. Thus, a representative sample of 598 canola seeds
taken from a homogeneous composite sample containing 0.5%
GM seed will contain at least one GM seed 95% of the time
(Table 1). In other words, if buyers want to be 95% confident
that they will reject seed lots with adventitious GM contamina-
tion at the level of 0.5% or more in the composite sample, then
the working sample must contain a minimum of 598 canola
seeds. This estimate of the required number of seeds in the
working sample is valid only if the analytical method has zero
false-positive and false-negative rates.
There is always a finite probability of a single adventitious
seed producing a positive test result by being present in the
working sample even when AP is at levels much lower than
the maximum allowable level. This limitation can be circum-
vented by considering three key factors in the statistical
approach: (1) the lower quality limit (LQL) or tolerance level,
which is the maximum percentage of GM seed allowable to
the end user (6, 8); (2) the acceptable quality limit (AQL), which
is the amount of GM contamination that is considered to be
acceptable by the producer (6, 8); and (3) the level of confidence
required at both the LQL and AQL.
Such an approach can be achieved by devising sampling plans
that require the analysis of multiple working samples and
permitting a defined number of positive results. Individual
positive test results arising from low levels of AP are thereby
permitted under such sampling plans, whereas larger numbers
of positives arising from GM levels of concern are not tolerated.
This approach, which reduces the probability of rejecting seed
lots with low levels of AP, cannot be implemented when a single
working sample is analyzed with a qualitative assay.
In the design of any sampling plan based on a semiquanti-
tative approach, it is essential to ensure that the analytical
method is capable of detecting a single GM seed among the
specified number of seeds in the working sample. The number
of working samples required may thus be influenced by the
sensitivity of the analytical method used for the detection of
GM contamination. This is particularly relevant in the case of
InVigor canola because expression of the introduced phosphi-
nothricin acetyltransferase (PAT) protein in seed tissue is very
weak (9). In contrast, the Roundup Ready (a registered
trademark of Monsanto Co.) canola construct uses a constitutive
promoter so the introduced CP4 5-enolpyruvylshikimate-3-
phosphate synthase (CP4 EPSPS) protein is expressed through-
out the plant, including the seed (10, 11).
The purpose of this study was to validate sampling plans and
test protocols for rapid, cost-effective, semiquantitative detection
of GM canola seed using an immunoassay. As expression of
the PAT protein in canola seed is known to be weak, protocols
to allow detection of this trait were taken as the model for this
investigation. However, these sampling plans can be utilized
together with test protocols for the detection of other traits
provided that the test has an equivalent or greater level of
sensitivity than the test used to detect InVigor canola seed.
Although the term “seed” is used throughout this paper to refer
to the canola, the term “seed” is to be taken to include both
seed and the canola seed (grain) that is harvested by the farmer/
grower.
Although the sampling procedure from seed lot to primary
sample did not form part of this study, a recent study on the
distribution of GM soybean in large shipments demonstrated
that randomness in seed lots cannot be assumed (1). This
highlights the need to consider lot heterogeneity in the design
of sampling protocols for the collection of primary samples from
a seed lot to ensure that the composite sample is representative
of the seed lot.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials. Genetically modified InVigor (MS8xRF3) canola seed
with a stated lot purity of >97% and conventional canola seed were
provided by Bayer CropScience. Roundup Ready RT73 canola seed
Certified Reference Material (AOCS 0304-B) with a lot purity above
99.19% at the 95% confidence level was obtained from the American
Oil Chemists’ Society (Champaign, IL). Canola seed samples, each
containing approximately 3300 seeds and comprising either 0.3, 0.6,
or 1.2% RoundUp Ready RT73 canola seed, were obtained from the
International Seed Testing Association (ISTA) as part of the sixth ISTA
proficiency test on GMO testing on canola seed.
Methods. Preparation of Working Samples. Synthetic working
samples containing a single InVigor canola seed in a total of 50 or
100 canola seeds were prepared by manually counting the required
number of seeds. Working samples comprising 100 canola seeds were
prepared from composite samples by either using a 50-seed counting
device twice or manually counting the required number of seeds.
Alternatively, working samples of approximately 100 seeds were
prepared from composite samples by weighing out the previously
determined average mass of 100 seeds. Working samples were
transferred to individual ziplock bags for storage prior to analysis.
Preparation of Composite Samples. Several synthetic or field-based
composite samples were prepared as follows: Two synthetic homo-
geneous composite samples (500 g) were prepared containing either
0.1 or 0.9% (w/w) InVigor canola seed by weighing out and combining
the required mass of both InVigor canola seed and conventional canola
seed. Each composite sample was homogenized by passing the seed
twice through a riffle divider and recombining according to the ISTA
guidelines (3).
A synthetic stratified composite sample containing 0.5% (w/w)
InVigor canola was prepared by combining 200 g portions of each of
the synthetic homogeneous 0.1 and 0.9% (w/w) InVigor canola seed
samples. Fourteen field-based composite samples (1-2 kg) were
collected from the grain flow during out-loading from a bin containing
42 tonnes of a relatively homogeneous mix of approximately 0.6% (w/
w) InVigor canola during a field trial (12). The synthetic stratified
composite sample and the field-based composite samples were all
individually mixed in accordance with ISTA guidelines (3) prior to
splitting into working samples.
Lateral Flow Strip Assay. The SDI Traitx LL test kit (part 7000043,
Strategic Diagnostics, Newark, DE) detects the PAT protein produced
from either the Streptomyces Viridichromogenes pat gene or the
Streptomyces hygroscopicus bar gene. The latter gene has been
incorporated into InVigor canola. Although the manufacturer claims a
Table 1. Number of Seeds Required in Working Sample To Ensure
with a Defined Degree of Confidence That at Least One GM Seed
Will Be Presenta
confidence level
% GM seed in composite sample
95%
99%
0.1
2995
4603
0.5
598
919
0.9
332
510
1.0
299
459
3.0
99
152
5.0
59
90
a Sample size is determined using the following formula: n ) log(1 −CL/
100))/log[1 −(P/100)] where n is the number of seeds required in composite sample,
CL is the probability (in percent) that at least one GM seed will be present in the
composite sample, and P is the actual perentage of GM seed in the composite
sample (16). Calculated values for sample size are rounded up to the next whole
number to specify minimum number of discrete seeds required in the sample.
B
Emslie et al.

detection limit of one LibertyLink (a registered trademark of Bayer
CropScience) corn kernel that expressed the PAT protein in 100
conventional corn kernels, a detection limit for InVigor canola seed
has not been specified.
The SDI Traitx LL test kit assay was performed in accordance with
the manufacturer’s instructions for bulk corn testing as supplied with
the kit with the following exceptions. The required number of working
samples each in a separate ziplock bag was allowed to equilibrate for
1 h at either 12 or 37 °C or room temperature. Working sample seeds
were then crushed inside the ziplock bag using a rolling pin and mixed
to form a slurry with 1.0 mL of water, which had also been
pre-equilibrated at the selected temperature. The slurry mixture was
allowed to settle for 10-20 min, and then 0.5 mL of the liquid was
transferred to a microcentrifuge tube. Two lateral flow strip assays were
conducted on each seed mixture. The strips were allowed to develop
for 10 min at the appropriate temperature (12 °C, room temperature,
or 37 °C), and then results were interpreted by three or four independent
analysts. Once a strip had developed (within 15 min), the top and bottom
absorbent pads were removed for archiving of the strip, as described
in the manufacturer’s application note.
Working sample negative and positive controls containing 50
conventional canola seeds or 49 conventional canola seeds plus a single
InVigor canola seed, respectively, were analyzed with each batch of
10 working samples.
ELISA Assays To Detect the PAT Protein and the CP4 EPSPS
Protein. The LibertyLink PAT/bar ELISA plate kit (catalog no. AP013,
Envirologix, Portland, ME) detects the PAT protein produced from the
S. hygroscopicus bar gene but not the PAT protein produced from the
S. Viridichromogenes pat gene. The manufacturer claims a detection
limit of 0.1% Starlink corn by weight but does not specify a detection
limit for InVigor canola seed.
The QualiPlate ELISA kit for Roundup Ready corn event 603 and
cotton (catalog no. AP010, Envirologix) detects the CP4 EPSPS protein.
The manufacturer claims a detection limit of 0.1% by weight for corn
event 603 but does not specify a detection limit for Roundup Ready
canola seed.
For analysis using either ELISA assay, a crude protein extract was
prepared from working samples by crushing the canola seeds inside a
ziplock bag with a rolling pin and then adding 1 mL of kit wash buffer
to form a slurry. A portion of the slurry (0.5 mL) was transferred to a
microcentrifuge tube and centrifuged at 13000 rpm in a benchtop
centrifuge for 10 min. The clear supernatant from each microcentrifuge
tube was then transferred to an individual well in a blank 96-well plate.
The ELISA was performed on samples of clear supernatant in
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions using the low-sensitivity
protocol for the Roundup Ready seed and the high-sensitivity protocol
for the InVigor seed.
Five negative control and at least two positive control working
samples were analyzed with each ELISA run. Negative controls
comprised 100 conventional canola seeds. Positive controls for the
LibertyLink PAT/bar ELISA and the QuickPlate ELISA kit for
Roundup Ready corn event 603 comprised 99 conventional canola seeds
together with either a single InVigor canola seed or a single Roundup
Ready RT73, respectively.
Verifying Suitability of Immunoassay Limit of Detection (LOD). The
lateral flow strip assay and, for the purposes of this study, the ELISA
both provide qualitative data as a positive or negative result. For a
qualitative assay, the LOD is generally expressed as the smallest amount
of analyte at which the analytical method will have a false-negative
rate of e5% (4, 13, 14).
When there are only two possible outcomes to a test, the results
obtained by repeated application of the test can be described by a
binomial distribution. At the LOD of a test where, by definition, the
probability of obtaining a false-negative result is 5%, it is possible to
predict the chance of obtaining a given number of false negatives for
any particular number of tests performed. In addition, the number of
tests required for estimation of the LOD can also be determined. Thus,
if an assay is repeated 57 times on independent synthetic working
samples containing a defined percentage of GM canola and there are
no false-negative results, this provides a level of confidence of 95%
that the assay is operating within the LOD (Figure 1). On the other
hand, if more than 6 false negatives are detected in a set of 57 assays,
it is very probable that the assay is not operating within its LOD.
An assumption of this approach is that every synthetic working
sample analyzed does contain a single InVigor canola seed. Because
the batch of InVigor canola seed used in this study had a stated purity
level of >97% GM seed, it is possible that a small number of working
samples in a set of 57 may in fact be spiked with a non-GM seed. This
would produce false false-negative results and prevent verification of
the LOD by this procedure. Consequently, any assay that produced a
negative test result was repeated using another lateral flow strip on the
same sample extract. If the repeated analysis produced a positive result,
the overall result for that sample was recorded as a true false negative.
However, if the duplicate test on a given apparently false-negative assay
was also negative, then the assay very probably contained no GM seed
and results from this sample were disregarded. The assay was then
repeated with another working sample.
Design of Sampling and Test Plans. Sampling and test plans were
devised on the basis of probabilities predicted by the binomial
distribution with the aid of SeedCalc7 software version 7.0 (http://
www.seedtest.org/en/content---1--1143.html), which provides tools to
enable design of sample plans based on either qualitative (6) or
quantitative (8) analytical methods. Test plans were designed to work
well within the LOD of the assay and, as such, no allowance was made
for a false-negative rate. The percentage impurity of composite samples
and the 95% confidence interval range for the true percentage impurity
were estimated on the basis of the number of working samples analyzed
using SeedCalc7 software (6).
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Verifying Suitability of Lateral Flow Strip Assay LOD.
In a previous study (12), consistent positive results were obtained
with the SDI Traitx LL lateral flow strips when using a ground
sample containing 2% (w/w) InVigor canola seed in conven-
tional canola seed, where the level of the PAT protein reflects
the average expression level across a large number of InVigor
canola seeds. However, because expression levels of the protein
may vary significantly between individual seeds, the LOD may
not necessarily be the same for a working sample containing a
single InVigor canola seed.
To determine if a working sample comprising a single InVigor
canola seed in a total of 50 canola seeds was within the LOD
of the assay, 57 assays were performed in an air-conditioned
environment at 20-25 °C on synthetic working samples
prepared with one InVigor seed and 49 conventional canola
seeds. Results were scored independently by three analysts, with
two analysts reporting a single false negative and the third
reporting two false negatives (data not shown). Assuming a
binomial distribution of outcomes when operating at the LOD,
1 or 2 false-negative results in a total of 57 assays would be
expected 16 and 24% of the time, respectively (Figure 1). If
Figure 1. Expected number of false-negative results in a total of 57 assays
when operating at a level of analyte with a true false-negative rate of
either 5 or 10% assuming a binomial distribution of outcomes.
Detection of Genetically Modified Canola Seed
C

the assay was operating below the LOD with a true false-
negative rate of 10%, 1 or 2 false-negative results in a total of
57 assays would be expected <5% of the time. This result thus
indicates that the LOD for this assay when conducted under
controlled laboratory conditions at 20-25 °C is close to a single
InVigor canola seed in 50 seeds. It should be noted that bands
signifying a positive result for these working samples were very
faint (as expected at the LOD), making result scoring very
subjective at the LOD. In addition, a faint band was sometimes
observed with negative controls giving the potential to score a
false-positive result.
One of the advantages of the lateral flow strip format is its
potential for use on site. To evaluate the robustness of the assay
under simulated field conditions, synthetic working samples
were analyzed at 45, 37, and 12 °C (data not shown). When
the assay was conducted at elevated temperatures, false positives
from conventional seed were common. For this reason, experi-
ments to determine the LOD at this temperature were not
undertaken. When the analysis was performed at 12 °C, four
independent analysts reported between 5 and 7 false negatives
from 30 tests. The binomial distribution predicts that at a true
LOD of 1 GM seed in 50 seeds, 5 false negatives from 30 tests
would be expected on approximately 1% of occasions. Six and
seven false negatives are even less likely. It is therefore almost
certain that the LOD of the assay is worse than 1 seed in 50
when performed at 12 °C.
Although lateral flow strips have the apparent advantages of
speed and limited demands on equipment and staff resources,
a critical requirement to ensure a cost-effective test plan is an
assay with an adequate LOD. An assay with a poor LOD will
require a larger number of tests on each composite sample. The
results obtained under simulated field conditions of high and
low temperatures suggest that an LOD of 1 in 50 is unlikely to
be achieved reliably in routine use outside a laboratory. Because
test plans should be designed to work well within the LOD of
the assay, lateral flow strip assays were not considered further
in this study. It should be noted, however, that this study
evaluated only one commercially available lateral flow strip
assay and does not necessarily reflect the suitability of other
commercially available assays.
Verifying Suitability of ELISA LOD. To determine if a
working sample comprising a single InVigor canola seed in 100
seeds was within the LOD of the LibertyLink PAT/bar ELISA,
59 assays were performed in an air-conditioned environment
at 20-25 °C on synthetic working samples prepared with one
InVigor seed and 99 conventional canola seeds. All 59 test
samples gave a response that was significantly stronger than
the 5 blank samples, verifying that the LOD of the ELISA is 1
InVigor canola seed in at least 100 conventional canola seeds
(95% confidence level) (Figure 2). The blanks had a mean
Abs450nm of 0.0146 and a standard deviation of 0.00055.
The 59 synthetic working samples analyzed by ELISA
displayed a wide range of Abs450nm values with a broad
distribution pattern ranging from 0.029 to 0.668 (Figure 2), but
even the lowest of these exceeds the average of the 5 blanks by
26 times the standard deviation. This provides a very high level
of confidence that the LOD of the ELISA exceeds the require-
ments of the sampling protocol. InVigor canola is a hybrid
between the RF3 and MS8 lines, and therefore individual seeds
contain either the RF3 construct alone or both the RF3 and MS8
constructs. Both the RF3 and MS8 parental lines contain the
bar gene. However, a previous study demonstrated that expres-
sion levels of the PAT protein vary considerably between the
parental lines and hybrid line, MS8xRF3, with samples of
homogenized canola seed from MS8, RF3, and the MS8xRF3
lines containing 0.69, 0.07, and 0.35 µg of PAT/g of seed,
respectively (9). The range in ELISA results from the synthetic
working samples in this study is thus consistent with the range
of expression levels observed in a previous study (9). This must
be considered in designing a sampling plan because the assay
must be capable of detecting an individual InVigor canola seed
in the working sample even if the expression level of PAT
protein in that seed is low. This implies that the detection limit
when working samples containing a single InVigor canola seed
in the sample are tested will be not as good as the detection
limit when working samples derived from a larger, uniform,
homogenized sample containing the equivalent percentage of
InVigor seeds are tested because the level of PAT protein in a
large, homogenized sample will reflect the average expression
level over a number of InVigor canola seeds.
Design of Test Plans. All test plans were designed to be
used in conjunction with the LibertyLink PAT/bar ELISA on
working samples comprising 100 canola seeds. Because the
ELISA reliably detected a single InVigor canola seed in a total
of 100 seeds across 59 assays, the false-negative rate for the
ELISA was assumed to be zero. On the basis of stakeholder
requirements, all test plans ensured a confidence level of 99%
that any composite sample at or above a designated LQL would
be correctly identified. To reduce the risk to the producer that
seed lots containing a very low adventitious level of GM seed
would be rejected, plans also provided 95% confidence that
composite samples below a designated AQL were correctly
identified. These test plans are designed on the basis that the
composite sample is representative of the whole seed lot.
Single-Stage Test Plans Designed To Meet Different AQLs.
A series of single-stage test plans was designed to ensure 99%
confidence of detecting composite samples containing at least
0.9% GM seed while providing varying levels of protection to
the producer by changing the AQL. Operating characteristic
curves, which plot the probability of accepting a lot against the
true state or actual percentage of GM impurity in the lot (7),
can be prepared and demonstrate the effect of changing the AQL
from 0.0% (plan 1) to 0.3% (plan 4) GM seed on the number
of working samples required (Figure 3a). Plan 1 comprises six
100-seed working samples, which is the minimum testing
requirement, and all six samples must return a negative result
Figure 2. Histogram of absorbance readings at 450 nm from 59 synthetic
100-seed working samples each containing a single InVigor canola seed
assayed using the Envirologix LibertyLink PAT/bar ELISA kit. Samples
were binned in intervals of 0.025 absorbance reading and were counted
in a particular bin if their absorbance reading was equal to the bin
absorbance value (shown on the y-axis) or no more than 0.025 absorbance
readings below that bin number. Horizontal bars indicate percentage of
samples within each bin. The blank assays had a mean Abs450nm of 0.0146
and a standard deviation of 0.00055.
D
Emslie et al.

to have the required level of confidence that the composite
sample contains <0.9% GM seed. Plan 1 does not specify an
AQL and thus provides little protection to the producer,
especially when low levels of GM seed are likely to be present
in the sample. This is because there is a high probability that
seed lots containing a low level of GM seed would be rejected.
Plans 2, 3, and 4 are designed to provide 95% confidence to
the producer that lots with an AP at the AQL of 0.1, 0.2, or
0.3%, respectively, will be accepted. This is achieved by
analyzing a greater number of working samples and allowing a
small number of positive samples. Hence, whereas plan 1
requires 6 working samples, plans 2, 3, and 4 require 13, 22,
and 32 working samples, respectively (Figure 3a).
As these single-stage test plans were all designed to provide
the same level of confidence at the LQL, the operating
characteristic curves all show only 1% acceptance when the true
concentration is 0.9%. The increased risk for the producer who
adopts plan 1 compared to plan 2, 3, or 4 is clearly demonstrated
through the change in shape of the operating characteristic curve
where the probability of accepting a lot using test plan 1 drops
dramatically as the actual percentage impurity of the lot
increases from 0 to 0.5% (Figure 3a). The additional testing
requirements for plans 2-4 lead to increased associated costs,
although this cost may be balanced by the increased number of
lots that are accepted. It is thus important that sampling plans
are carefully designed to address the defined parameters required
of both the buyer and the seller while minimizing the number
of tests required.
Two-Stage Test Plans. Two-stage testing plans were designed
to minimize the number of assays required. A small number of
tests are conducted initially to identify composite samples that
are clearly above or below the threshold. The second stage is
required only for samples displaying an equivocal result. This
can provide significant savings in time and consumables where
the majority of composite samples are expected to be either
well below the AQL or above the LQL.
For example, the addition of a second stage to plan 1 (Figure
3a), as shown in plan 5 (Figure 3b), retains the advantage of
requiring a minimal number of tests in stage 1 while providing
protection to the producer in the second stage in the case of
positives resulting from low levels of AP. At an AQL of 0.1%
GM, about 40% of composite samples would require the full
two-stage testing protocol (Figure 3b). If it is anticipated that
composite samples will usually contain much less than 0.1%
GM seed, significant cost-savings will be achieved by adopting
this two-stage sampling protocol.
Single-Stage Test Plans Designed To Meet Different LQLs.
Plans 6, 7, and 8 are designed to ensure 99% confidence of
detecting composite samples at a designated LQL of 0.5, 1.0,
or 1.5%, respectively. These plans all provide 95% probability
of accepting a lot when the true concentration of GM seed is
0.1% as demonstrated by the operating characteristic curves
(Figure 3c). As the LQL decreases from 1.5 to 0.5%, the
required number of working samples increases from 7 to 33.
Validation of Sampling and Test Plans. Synthetic Homo-
geneous Composite Samples. To validate the process of splitting
composite samples into working samples and applying indi-
vidual test plans with differing AQL and LQL requirements,
91 working samples were prepared from each of two synthetic
composite samples containing either 0.1 or 0.9% (w/w) InVigor
canola seed. Working samples were analyzed by ELISA and
the resultant data used to evaluate the efficacy of the devised
test plans (Table 2). For each test plan, results from the 91
working samples were considered consecutively to create the
maximum number of independent data sets for evaluation. For
example, plan 1 utilizes 6 working samples so 15 independent
sets of working samples were evaluated, whereas for plan 4,
32 working samples are required, so only 2 independent data
sets could be assessed.
Test plans 1-6 were designed to ensure 99% confidence of
detecting composite samples at an LQL of 0.9% or below. Each
of these test plans correctly classified the synthetic composite
sample containing 0.9% (w/w) InVigor canola as exceeding the
LQL (Table 2). Plans 7 and 8, which had LQLs of 1.0 and
1.5%, respectively, also consistently classified this synthetic
sample as exceeding the LQL. This is not unexpected because
the operating characteristic curves indicate that the probability
Figure 3. Operating characteristic curves for test plans using 100-seed
working samples and designed to ensure at least 99% confidence of
identifying composite samples at the designated LQL and 95% confidence
at the designated AQL. Plans were derived using SeedCalc7 software:
(a) single-stage test plans designed to meet different AQLs at a designated
LQL of 0.9% GM seed; (b) two-stage test plan at a designated LQL of
0.9% GM seed designed to reduce costs if seed lots are expected to
contain much less than the designated AQL of 0.1% GM seed [dotted
line indicates probability of requiring stage two testing (secondary y-axis)];
(c) single-stage test plans designed to meet different LQLs at a designated
AQL of 0.1% GM seed.
Detection of Genetically Modified Canola Seed
E

of accepting a lot with a true GM contamination of 0.9% for
test plans 7 and 8 is 1.7 and 10.1%, respectively (Figure 3c).
In the case of the synthetic composite sample containing 0.1%
(w/w) InVigor canola, test plans 2-8 all correctly classified
the composite sample as below the designated LQL, thus
meeting the AQL for these test plans of between 0.1 and 0.3%
GM canola. However, plan 1, which was evaluated using 15
independent data sets, classified this sample as exceeding the
LQL of 0.9% on 4 occasions (Table 2). Because plan 1 has an
AQL of 0.0% and has not been designed to provide protection
to the producer, a frequency of 27% rejection is not unreasonable
based on the operating characteristic curve for plan 1, which
predicts that 45% of samples with a true GM contamination of
0.1% would be rejected.
Synthetic Stratified Composite Sample. To validate the
sampling and testing process on a nonhomogeneous sample, a
stratified composite sample comprising equal amounts of 0.1
and 0.9% (w/w) InVigor canola was prepared and mixed in
accordance with ISTA guidelines (3). Ninety-one working
samples were prepared from the mixed composite sample, and
33 of the 91 samples were positive when assayed by ELISA.
On the basis of the binomial distribution, the probability of a
single working sample of 100 seeds containing no GM seeds is
estimated as 60.6% when the true GM contamination is 0.5%
(w/w). Therefore, the probability that it would contain one or
more GM seeds is 39.4%. Using this probability, 36 positive
samples in a series of 91 independent working samples is the
modal outcome predicted by the binomial distribution on seed
with a true GM contamination of 0.5% (w/w), and hence 33
positive samples, as observed experimentally in this study, is a
plausible result.
Test plans 1 and 2 classified the 0.5% (w/w) synthetic
stratified composite sample as exceeding an LQL of 0.9% on
93 and 86% of occasions, respectively, whereas plans 3 and 4
both classified the sample as exceeding 0.9 on 50% of occasions
(Table 2). These results correspond closely to those predicted
from the operating characteristic curves for plans 1, 2, 3, and
4, which demonstrate probabilities of exceeding the LQL of
95, 82, 69, and 51%, respectively (Figure 3a). The two-stage
testing plan, plan 5, was evaluated using six independent datasets
and required progression to the second stage on each occasion
(Table 2), suggesting that such a two-stage testing plan may
not be cost-effective for samples containing contamination levels
midway between the AQL and LQL. Plan 6 correctly classified
the sample as meeting or exceeding an LQL of 0.5%, whereas
plans 7 and 8 classified the sample as exceeding an LQL of 1.0
or 1.5% on 43 and 54% of occasions, respectively.
Analysis of Composite Samples Collected from Grain
Flow during Out-loading from a Bin. Fourteen composite
samples collected from the grain flow during out-loading from
a bin containing approximately 42 tonnes of a relatively
homogeneous mix of 0.6% (w/w) InVigor canola seed (12) were
each mixed twice in their entirety using a riffle mixer; 13-15
100-seed working samples of each were then prepared by
manual counting or by weighing an amount equivalent to the
average weight of 100 seeds and analyzed by ELISA. The data
obtained were processed using SeedCalc7 to obtain estimates
of the InVigor canola content of the composite samples.
The estimated percentage impurity and 95% confidence
interval range for the 14 field-based composite samples varied
from 0.17% with a confidence interval range of 0.02-0.6%
(composite sample 1) to 1.46% with a confidence interval range
of 0.62-2.94% (composite sample 13) (Figure 4). For 13 of
the 14 composite samples, the percentage of InVigor canola of
approximately 0.6% (w/w) seed fell within the 95% confidence
interval range for the true percentage impurity, and it fell just
outside the range for the remaining sample, composite
sample 13.
When interpreted using the devised test plans, all 14
composite samples were classified as exceeding a 0.9% LQL
threshold for GM contamination using test plan 1 and the two-
stage protocol, plan 5, whereas test plan 2 classified 13 of the
composite samples as exceeding this threshold (data not shown).
Plans 7 and 8 classified 13 or 12 composite samples as
exceeding an LQL of 1.0 or 1.5%, respectively. On the basis
of the operating characteristic curves, test plans 1, 2, and 5 all
have a <10% probability of accepting a lot with 0.6% impurity;
hence, the results obtained are consistent with predicted results.
Analysis of ISTA Proficiency Samples Using Test Plans.
Seven blind canola seed samples containing 0.3, 0.6, or 1.2%
RoundUp Ready canola seed were analyzed as part of the sixth
ISTA proficiency study for GM canola seed using the Quick-
Plate ELISA kit for Roundup Ready corn event 603. Each
sample comprised approximately 3300 canola seeds. The results
for each sample were applied to test plans 1-4, and the
percentage of GM was estimated on the basis of the number of
Table 2. Classification of Synthetic Composite Samples Containing
0.1, 0.5, or 0.9% (w/w) InVigor Canola Seed Using Devised Test
Plans
test plana
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
no. of times plan evaluatedb
15
7
4
2
c
2
7
13
InVigor canola sample
0.1% (w/w) homogeneous
classified as exceeding LQL (maximum % GM seed allowable)
number times
4
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
%
27
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.9% (w/w) homogeneous
classified as exceeding LQL (maximum % GM seed allowable)
number times
15
7
4
2
15
2
7
13
%
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
0.5% (w/w) stratified
classified as exceeding LQL (maximum % GM seed allowable)
number times
14
6
2
1
5
2
3
7
%
93
86
50
50
83
100
43
54
a Test plans are as outlined in Figure 3. b Ninety-one working samples were
prepared from each composite sample and analyzed using the Envirologix
LibertyLink PAT/bar ELISA. c The 0.1, 0.9, and 0.5% (w/w) InVigor canola tests
using plan 5 were evaluated 10, 15, and 6 times, respectively, and required second-
stage testing on 30, 0, and 100% occasions, respectively.
Figure 4. Estimated percentage of GM in composite samples collected
from the grain flow during out-loading from a bin containing 42 tonnes of
a relatively homogeneous mix of approximately 0.6% (w/w) InVigor canola
seed. Percentage of GM (triangles) and 95% confidence intervals (vertical
bars) were estimated using SeedCalc software based on analysis of 13
working samples from each composite sample.
F
Emslie et al.

working samples analyzed for each test plan. Although a total
of 33 100-seed working samples were analyzed for each
proficiency sample, test plans 1-4 required analysis of only 6,
13, 22, and 32 working samples, respectively. For each test plan,
results for the working samples were considered consecutively
until the required number of working samples for the test plan
had been considered.
Test plans 1-4 all correctly classified two canola seed
samples containing 1.2% RoundUp Ready canola seed as
exceeding an LQL of 0.9% (data not shown). These plans also
classified three proficiency samples containing 0.6% RoundUp
Ready canola seed as exceeding an LQL of 0.9% (data not
shown). However, this is not unexpected because test plans 1-4
all have a <25% probability of accepting a lot with 0.6%
impurity (Figure 3a). Test plans 3 and 4 correctly classified
two proficiency samples containing 0.3% RoundUp Ready
canola seed as below an LQL of 0.9% (data not shown).
However, one or both of the proficiency samples containing
0.3% RoundUp Ready canola seed were classified as exceeding
an LQL of 0.9% using test plans 2 and 1, respectively (data
not shown). This difference in classification of the samples
containing 0.3% RoundUp Ready canola seed reflects the
differences in AQLs among plans 1-4 and demonstrates the
potential advantage for the producer when using either test
plan 3 or 4.
The percentage of GM together with 95% confidence intervals
was estimated for each proficiency sample, on the basis of the
required number of working samples for each test plan. All four
test plans correctly estimated the percentage of GM in each
proficiency sample, taking into consideration the 95% confi-
dence intervals for the estimated percentage of GM (Figure 5).
Plan 1 requires the minimal number of six working samples
and, consequently, the 95% confidence intervals for this plan
are quite large. For example, using test plan 1 proficiency
samples S8 and S10, which both comprised 0.3% RoundUp
Ready canola seed, had 95% confidence intervals for the
estimated percentages of GM of 0.13-2.11 and 0.04-1.49,
respectively (Figure 5a). By increasing the number of working
samples to 13 and 22, as for test plans 2 and 3, respectively,
the 95% confidence interval range was reduced substantially.
However, further increasing the number of working samples to
32 samples using test plan 4 had only a marginal impact on the
confidence interval range, suggesting that the increased costs
associated with test plan 4 may not be justified. A cost-benefit
analysis, which evaluates the requirements of both the buyer
and the producer and the costs associated with each test plan,
would be required to determine the most appropriate plan for a
specific purpose.
Overall Uncertainty of the Process of Sampling and
Analyzing a Seed Lot. The uncertainty associated with
determining GM content in a seed lot comprises the uncertainty
in the collection of the composite sample together with that of
the analytical procedure, which includes both reduction of the
composite sample to one or more working samples and analysis
of these samples. If a quantitative assay such as quantitative
PCR is used, it would be possible to combine the uncertainties
as the square root of the sum of the squared relative standard
uncertainties in the usual way (15). This is not the case when
a qualitative ELISA assay is used in the semiquantitative
approach used in this study. It is, however, possible to obtain
an indication of the overall uncertainty by a sensitivity analysis
using the operating characteristic curve of the selected sampling
plan and the maximum uncertainty in the preparation of the
composite sample (at the 95% confidence level). These sampling
plans are predicated on reliable detection of a single seed in
the sample size stated, and no allowance for false negatives
has been made. It is thus important to ensure that the assay on
which the sampling plan is based will be required to detect only
GM concentrations above that of its LOD.
Application of Sampling Plans. This study has investigated
and validated sampling plans and test protocols for rapid, cost-
effective, semiquantitative detection of GM canola seed in
composite samples. A critical requirement to ensure a cost-
effective test plan is an assay with an adequate LOD. This is
particularly relevant to immunoassays, which rely on adequate
expression of the introduced protein in seed tissue. In the case
of InVigor canola, expression of the introduced PAT protein in
seeds is weak and the lateral flow strip assay was not sensitive
enough for practical implementation into a sampling plan. The
ELISA demonstrated greater reliability and a lower LOD, and
both single- and two-stage sampling plans that provided at least
Figure 5.
Estimated percentage of GM in ISTA proficiency samples
containing (a) 0.3%, (b) 0.6%, and (c) 1.2% RoundUp Ready RT73 canola.
W6, W13, W22, and W32 indicate analysis of 6, 13, 22, and 32 working
samples, respectively, which correspond to the numbers of working
samples required for test plans 1−4, respectively. S3, S5, S6, S7, S8,
S9, and S10 denote ISTA proficiency samples. Percentage of GM
(triangles) and 95% confidence intervals (vertical bars) were estimated
using SeedCalc software based on analysis of the required number of
working samples for the corresponding test plan. See Figure 3a for details
on test plans 1−4.
Detection of Genetically Modified Canola Seed
G

99% confidence of identifying composite samples at the
designated LQL and 95% confidence at the AQL were validated
using this assay. The devised sampling plans must be used in
conjunction with an established procedure for collection of
primary samples from the bulk sample and preparation of the
composite sample to ensure the composite sample is representa-
tive of the seed lot.
ABBREVIATIONS USED
Abs450nm, absorbance reading at 450 nm; AQL, acceptable
quality limit; AP, adventitious presence; CP4 EPSPS, CP4
5-enolpyruvylshikimate-3-phosphate synthase; ELISA, enzyme-
linked immunosorbent assay; GM, genetically modified; GMO,
genetically modified organism; ISTA, International Seed Testing
Association; LOD, limit of detection; LQL, lower quality limit;
OGTR, Office of the Gene Technology Regulator; PAT,
phosphinothricin acetyltransferase.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The technical assistance of Gursharan Bains and Zena Kassir
is gratefully acknowledged. The authors thank Dr. Wendy
Lawson for her detailed comments on the manuscript.
LITERATURE CITED
(1) Paoletti, C.; Heissenberger, A.; Mazzara, M.; Larcher, S.;
Grazioli, E.; Corbisier, P.; Hess, N.; Berben, G.; Lubeck, P. S.;
De Loose, M.; Moran, G.; Henry, C.; Brera, C.; Folch, I.; Ovesna,
J.; Van den Eede, G. Kernel lot distribution assessment (KeL-
DA): a study on the distribution of GMO in large soybean
shipments. Eur. Food Res. Technol. 2006, 224, 129-139.
(2) Macarthur, R.; Murray, A. W.; Allnutt, T. R.; Deppe, C.; Hird,
H. J.; Kerins, G. M.; Blackburn, J.; Brown, J.; Stones, R.; Hugo,
S. Model for tuning GMO detection in seed and grain. Nat.
Biotechnol. 2007, 25 (2), 169-170.
(3) Kruse, M. ISTA Handbook on Seed Sampling, 2nd ed.; Interna-
tional Seed Testing Association: Bassersdorf, Switzerland, 2004.
(4) Lipp, M.; Shillito, R.; Giroux, R.; Spiegelhalter, F.; Charlton,
S.; Pinero, D.; Song, P. Polymerase Chain Reaction technology
as analytical tool in agricultural biotechnology. J. AOAC Int.
2005, 88 (1), 136-155.
(5) Begg, G.; Cullen, D.; Iannetta, P.; Squire, G. Sources of
uncertainty in the quantification of genetically modified oilseed
rape contamination in seed lots. Transgenic Res. 2007, 16 (1),
51-63.
(6) Remund, K. M.; Dixon, D. A.; Wright, D. L.; Holden, L. R.
Statistical considerations in seed purity testing for transgenic
traits. Seed Sci. Res. 2001, 11, 101-119.
(7) Whitaker, T. B.; Freese, L.; Giesbrecht, F. G.; Slate, A. B.
Sampling grain shipments to detect genetically modified seed.
J. AOAC Int. 2001, 84 (6), 1941-1946.
(8) Laffont, J.-L.; Remund, K. M.; Wright, D.; Simpson, R. D.;
Gre´goire, S. Testing for adventitious presence of transgenic
material in conventional seed or grain lots using quantitative
laboratory methods: statistical procedures and their implementa-
tion. Seed Sci. Res. 2005, 15 (3), 197-204(8).
(9) OGTR. Risk assessment and risk management plan. Application
for licence for dealings inVolVing an intentional release into the
enVironment. DIR021/2002. Commercial release of genetically
modified (InVigor® hybrid) canola; Australian Government
Office of the Gene Technology Regulator: Canberra, Australia,
2003.
(10) Maiti, I. B.; Gowda, S.; Kiernan, J.; Ghosh, S. K.; Shepherd, R.
J. Promoter/leader deletion analysis and plant expression vectors
with the figwort mosaic virus (FMV) full length transcript (FLt)
promoter containing single or double enhancer domains. Trans-
genic Res. 1997, 6 (2), 143-156.
(11) Sanger, M.; Daubert, S.; Goodman, R. M. Characteristics of a
strong promoter from figwort mosaic virus: comparison with
the analogous 35S promoter from cauliflower mosaic virus and
the regulated mannopine synthase promoter. Plant Mol. Biol.
1990, 14 (3), 433-443.
(12) Viljoen, J.; Griffiths, K.; Murphy, B.; Robinson, G.; Lwin, T.;
Clamp, P.; Wilson, P. Segregating GM and non-GM Grain in
the Australian Grain Storage System; Commonwealth of Aus-
tralia: Canberra, Australia, 2005.
(13) Codex Alimentarius Commission. Procedural Manual, Principles
for the Establishment of Codex Methods of Analysis, Guidelines
on the Application of the Criteria Approach, 12th ed.;
2001.
(14) ISO. ISO 24276:2006(E) Foodstuffssmethods of analysis for
the detection of genetically modified organisms and deriVed
productssgeneral requirements and definitions; International
Standardization Organization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2006.
(15) ISO. Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement;
International Standardization Organization: Geneva, Switzerland,
1995.
(16) GIPSA. Sampling for the detection of biotech grains; http://
archive.gipsa.usda.gov/biotech/sample2.htm.
Received for review January 30, 2007. Revised manuscript received
March 15, 2007. Accepted March 22, 2007. This project was funded in
part by the Australian Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and
Forestry.
JF070267I
H
PAGE EST: 7.7
Emslie et al.