Biotechnology
briefs
Value of biotechnology 
applications to 
Australian agriculture
How can I get copies?
For a free copy of these and other DAFF publications 
please email: agbiotech@daff .gov.au
Visit the Australian Government Department of 
Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry website for 
regular updates and information on agricultural 
biotechnology:
www.daff .gov.au/agbiotech
‘We want to ensure that developments in 
biotechnology are captured for the benefi t of the 
Australian community, industry and the environment, 
while safeguarding human health and ensuring 
environmental protection.’
DAFF job no. 950573
What are the future applications of biotechnology to 
Australian agriculture?
Examples of future applications include:
the development of high throughput automated 
• 
DNA sequencing and low cost genotyping 
identifi cation
the expansion of tests for soil diagnostics to 
• 
incorporate other soil-borne pathogens, which 
could allow more productive use of land
greater utilisation of the technology to ensure 
• 
quality through verifying crop identity and purity
extension of the pesticide cleanup technology to 
• 
other intractable pesticides.
What are the overall benefi ts?
There are many benefi ts to be gained from the 
increased use of biotechnology in agriculture. 
They include:
improved speed to market
• 
reduced environmental damage
• 
healthier and more valuable livestock and crops
• 
maintenance of, or improvements in, 
• 
productivity. 
How do I fi nd out more?
This brochure is one of a series of Biotechnology briefs 
on biotechnology and Australian agriculture.
More information is available in the report:
Thorburn L., Parbeen S. and Ironfi eld D. 2007, The 
Value of Biotechnology Applications to Australian 
Agriculture, Australian Government Department of 
Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry.
Other titles in this series of Biotechnology briefs:
GM canola Potential impacts on organic farming in 
Australia
GM grains in Australia: Identity preservation
GM oilseed crops and the Australian oilseed industry
 Market acceptance of GM canola
GM crops: Tools for insect pest and weed control
GM canola: An information package
 
The Australian Government’s National Biotechnology 
Strategy funded the production of these brochures 
and reports. 
:

This brochure reviews the current status of 
biotechnology in Australian agriculture, excluding 
genetically modifi ed (GM) crops. It looks at the 
wide-ranging benefi ts that biotechnology currently 
provides along the supply chain and the substantial 
potential of this exciting new range of tools and 
techniques. 
Which biotechnology tools and techniques exist in 
Australia’s agricultural industries?
There are four main categories of non-GM 
biotechnology:
DNA and RNA technologies – used to study 
1. 
genes and gene expression
protein technologies – used to study protein 
2. 
production and function in diff erent species and 
varieties
cell and tissue culture and engineering – used to 
3. 
understand and manipulate cellular processes, 
including immune reactions and embryonic 
development 
process biotechnologies – using micro-
4. 
organisms or their chemicals for the purpose of 
transforming materials into a product.
Non-GM biotechnology is currently used extensively 
in Australia for plant and animal breeding and disease 
management. 
Its wide-ranging impact can best be appreciated 
in light of the component parts of the supply chain:
growing and husbandry
• 
logistics and support
• 
processing
• 
waste management. 
• 
What are the applications in growing and husbandry?
Breeding: Marker-assisted selection (MAS) is widely 
used, particularly in the grains and cattle industries. 
MAS helps breeders obtain detailed genetic 
information about breeding stock and allows new, 
more productive or higher value varieties of plants 
and breeding lines of livestock to be developed faster 
than through the use of conventional technology.
Examples include:
development of strawberry varieties with 
• 
superior fl avour and fl owering characteristics
rapid development of new barley varieties with 
• 
improved quality e.g. enhanced malting quality, 
weed competitiveness and disease resistance
use of genetic markers to identify cattle with 
• 
improved meat quality e.g. marbling and 
tenderness. 
New, rapid and cheaper genome screening 
techniques are being developed which may enable 
a greater proportion of agricultural industries to 
capture the value of this technology.
Disease diagnosis and management: The use 
of biotechnology for disease diagnosis is well 
established, and Australia has the capacity to develop 
new diagnostics for emerging threats. 
Examples include the use of DNA technologies to:
measure the genetic diversity of sugarcane smut 
• 
and enable production of Australian sugarcane 
smut-resistant cultivars
screen soil to identify and semi-quantify the 
• 
presence of certain fungi and nematodes, which 
enables producers to choose the most suitable 
rotation crops
develop and deliver new vaccines, including a 
• 
one-dose, intra-nasal vaccine against bovine 
herpes virus-1, a cause of sickness and death in 
Australian feedlot cattle. 
What are the applications in logistics and support? 
Commercial applications of both protein and 
DNA techniques are being developed to improve 
product quality and meet increasing domestic and 
international requirements for verifi cation and trace 
back, along the supply chain. 
Examples include: 
the WheatRite®  anti-body based test which 
• 
allows wheat and barley damaged by pre-harvest 
sprouting to be identifi ed and separated
the commercial availability of tests to verify grain 
• 
variety and purity 
the availability of genetic tests that enable cattle 
• 
feed effi  ciency to be maximised
the development of genetic identifi cation 
• 
systems to prevent product substitution in the 
fi sh industry. 
What about processing? 
Currently there is limited use of biotechnology in 
processing of agricultural products in Australia 
beyond traditional food manufacture. A few 
Australian companies are developing functional food 
or nutraceutical ingredients. 
And waste management? 
Biotechnology applications have great potential in 
waste remediation. 
Examples of current use include:
the development of Landguard™ OPA to speed 
• 
remediation of organophosphate chemicals used 
on crops and in sheep dip
use of bacteria to remove excess nitrogen and 
• 
phosphorus from heavily contaminated abattoir 
wastewater.
What is Australia’s use of biotechnology in agriculture 
in relation to our competitors?
Australia is considered to be generally ahead of 
competitors in the use of genetic markers and 
artifi cial insemination for animal breeding, and is on 
par in the use of DNA and protein-based diagnostic 
tests and disease treatments.
However, our competitors are well ahead in other 
areas, including:
some genome sequencing projects involving 
• 
Australian species e.g. Eucalyptus spp
proteomics for agriculture, which involves 
• 
studying an organism’s proteins and their role in 
its structure, growth, health, disease, etc. 
development of new vaccines for livestock 
• 
applications
biofuels
• 
functional foods and nutraceuticals 
• 
use of biotechnology in the fi bre industry 
• 
e.g. wood pulp.