Free trade agreements signed or concluded (but not yet in

force)

Australia-European Union Free Trade Agreement

On 24 March 2026, the Prime Minister of Australia, Anthony Albanese, and President of the European

Commission, Ursula von der Leyen, announced the conclusion of negotiations on the Australia-

European Union Free Trade Agreement (A-EU FTA). Australia and the EU will now commence

domestic parliamentary processes required for signature, which may take up to two years.

Upon entry into force of the A EU FTA, 68.5 per cent of agricultural products by tariff line and 93.9 per

cent by value will enter the EU duty-free, rising to 92.8 per cent and 94.8 per cent upon full

implementation. The Agreement will eliminate almost all EU tariffs on agricultural products, including

wine, tree nuts, horticulture, honey, olive oil, processed foods, most dairy products, and cereals such as

wheat and barley. For other important agricultural products, the Agreement delivers commercially

meaningful access through new or expanded tariff rate quota volumes, including for beef, sheep meat,

sugar, rice, wheat gluten, skimmed milk powder and natural butter.

In 2025, the EU was Australia’s 6th largest agriculture, fisheries and forestry export market, worth $4.0

billion.

Free trade agreements under negotiation

Australia-India Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Agreement

Australia and India formally launched Australia-India Comprehensive Economic Cooperation

Agreement (CECA) negotiations in May 2011. In 2025, India was Australia’s 9th largest agriculture,

fisheries and forestry export market, worth $2.6 billion.

CECA negotiations were suspended in 2016 before recommencing in September 2021.

An interim agreement with India - called the Australia-India Economic Cooperation and Trade

Agreement (ECTA) - was signed on 2 April 2022 and entered into force on 29 December 2022.

CECA negotiations continue and aim to build upon ECTA outcomes to develop closer economic ties

between Australia and India.

Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/market-access-trade/fta/ftas-signed-under-negotiation