The 2021 Independent Review of the Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Regulatory System in Australia

What do the proposed changes mean for…

PROFESSIONAL PESTICIDE APPLICATORS?

As an independent Panel, we have reviewed the Australian pesticides and veterinary medicines regulatory system. We have recommended changes that will improve the way you interact with pesticides as part of your work.

As a professional pesticide applicator, your duties may solely relate to applying pesticides (for example, a pest control technician), or it might only be one part of your job (for example, a ranger who undertakes seasonal weed management). Pesticides can be applied by professionals in many settings, including:

agricultural

domestic/industrial buildings

national parks

urban areas.

Our recommended changes aim to help you conduct your work by giving you:

Nationally consistent licensing, education, training, and competency. National licensing for pesticide applicators, coupled with consistent training requirements will reduce administrative burdens and duplication in costs, allowing you to conduct activities safely and easily across state and territory borders (Recommendation 20).

More choice in the products you use. A new licensing scheme for internationally registered products will allow pesticides registered overseas that meet robust criteria into Australia in a timely manner, giving you access to product and use choices currently only available in overseas markets (Recommendation 36).

Consistent national access to products and uses. Approved uses of pesticides currently vary between states and territories. Under the proposed new system, approved uses will be consistent across Australia making it easier for you to operate across borders (Recommendation 43).

Other benefits that will improve the system and support professional applicators include:

Up-to-date safety and use information. The introduction of a smart labelling system over time, will allow label information to be updated instantaneously and in multiple languages so you can see any updates and ensure you are using products safely and effectively (Recommendation 24).

A humaneness score on product labels. This score will help you make an informed decision and answer questions from clients by detailing how humane a vertebrate pest control product is when compared to other products available for the same purpose (Recommendation 17).

Find out more about our recommendations by reading the final report or visiting haveyoursay.awe.gov.au/agvet-chemicals-regulatory-reform.

Not a professional pesticide applicator? View our other resources that might be relevant to you.