The 2021 Independent Review of the Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Regulatory System in Australia

What do the proposed changes mean for… 
FARM BUSINESSES, GROWER GROUPS AND LAND MANAGERS?

As an independent Panel, we have reviewed the Australian pesticides and veterinary medicines regulatory system. We have recommended changes that will improve the accessibility and safe use of pesticides and veterinary medicines.

As part of your agricultural practices, you might use pesticides and veterinary medicines to protect crops from pests and weeds, protect livestock and companion animals from disease and illness, and control vermin.

Our recommended changes aim to help you conduct your business by:

Giving you more choice in the products you use. A new licensing scheme for internationally registered products will allow overseas pesticides and veterinary medicines that meet robust criteria to be introduced into Australia in a timely manner. This will give you access to product and use choices currently only available to your overseas competitors and allow your agricultural operations to respond to climatic, economic and market drivers without jeopardising trade or social licence (Recommendation 36).

Improving access to fast tracked products. Fast tracked product registration will give you more timely access to the products you need such as those that provide effective pest and disease management, enhance farm viability, and protect ecosystems (Recommendation 42).

Improving Australia’s emergency preparedness. Streamlining systems to prepare for, and react to, emergency events (such as exotic animal or plant diseases) will help protect your livelihood, protect ecosystems and aid in Australia’s recovery from such events (Recommendation 39).

Supporting your use of cross-border contractors. Increasing workforce access and mobility through new nationally consistent licensing, education, training, and competency requirements can help to improve your business’s efficiency and competitiveness through an increase in available contractors (Recommendation 20).

Providing consistent national access to products and uses. How and where you use pesticides and veterinary medicines currently varies across Australian borders. Under the proposed new system, approved uses will vary across different geographic and climatic regions, while a product’s directions for use will be consistent nationwide (Recommendation 43).

Recognising good agricultural practices. Formal recognition of industry and farmer’s quality assurance schemes will give consumers confidence in your produce and will reduce duplication in record keeping (recommendation 19).

Providing up-to-date labelling information. The introduction of a smart labelling system allows label information to be updated instantaneously and in multiple languages so you’re aware if you need to change how you use a particular product (Recommendation 24).

Simplified mechanism for adding uses to labels. Filling the gap between permits and registrations, supplemental labels will allow you to access new and minor uses that have been added to registered products, increasing your market access. (Recommendation 41)

Other benefits that will improve the system and support the agricultural industry include:

Securing Australia’s international trade reputation. Establishing a comprehensive system that aligns quality assurance schemes and monitoring and surveillance will help strengthen Australia’s international trade reputation (Recommendations 11, 12 and 19).

Increasing consumer confidence. Domestic produce and environmental monitoring will give consumers confidence in your produce and agricultural production processes and provide a competitive advantage for high quality products (Recommendation 12).

Giving you a national voice. The establishment of a stakeholder forum between government and national industry member groups, including peak farming bodies, will allow you to contribute to discussions that impact on farm practices and your farm business (Recommendation 10).

Find out more about our recommendations by reading the final report or visiting haveyoursay.awe.gov.au/agvet-chemicals-regulatory-reform.

Not part of a farming or grower group? View our other resources that might be relevant to you.