What is ehrlichiosis?

Canine ehrlichiosis (pronounced ‘err-lick-ee-oh-sis’) is a disease of dogs caused by infection with a bacterium called 

Ehrlichia canis. The bacterium is carried by ticks. In Australia, dogs can be infected with E.canis after being bitten by an 

infected brown dog tick. E. canis occurs worldwide, particularly in tropical and subtropical regions. The first detection 

of ehrlichiosis in Australia was in May 2020. Since then, the disease has been diagnosed in the northern regions of 

Western Australia and South Australia, all of the Northern Territory and northwestern Queensland.

This fact sheet provides important facts about this disease, and why it is important to prevent further spread of the 

disease to areas where brown dog ticks exist but ehrlichiosis currently does not.

This map shows the areas of Australia where the brown dog ticks that spread E. canis are likely 

to be found. This is different from the distribution of the paralysis tick, which is found along the 

east coast.

What happens when a dog is infected with E.canis?

Some dogs become unwell 1–3 weeks after being bitten by an infected tick. This is called an acute infection and needs 

veterinary treatment. In countries where ehrlichiosis has been present for a long time, most dogs experience mild and 

treatable illness. However, in Australia, where the dog population has no previous exposure to the disease, there is a 

high rate of severe illness and death during the acute phase, especially if unwell dogs do not receive veterinary care.

Other dogs may be infected but show no signs of disease, which is known as subclinical infection, meaning it is 

a hidden infection. Infected dogs may clear the bacteria from the bloodstream or they may become subclinical 

carriers of the bacteria in the spleen and bone marrow, with no signs of illness, for months or years. Subclinical 

carriers may develop another form of the disease, known as chronic ehrlichiosis, which tends to be severe and is 

often untreatable.

Treatment 

Is my dog completely cured after treatment for acute ehrlichiosis? 

Most dogs who receive veterinary treatment for acute infection respond well and appear to make a full recovery. 

Unfortunately, however, there is no straightforward way to monitor the long-term success of treatment of acute 

infection. There is no easy test to assess whether the bacteria remain in the tissues, but not in the bloodstream.  

This is because the bacteria can hide in the tissues and be undetectable in blood tests. 

The only way to detect the bacteria in this case is by sampling the spleen or bone marrow. 

This procedure is risky, because it requires anaesthetising the dog, and may cause severe 

bleeding from the sampling site, which could be fatal. There is also no guarantee that the 

bacteria will be found. Because of these challenges, a dog who is diagnosed with acute 

or subclinical ehrlichiosis is considered potentially subclinically infected for life, even 

after treatment.

LEARN MORE

Canine ehrlichiosis: 

guidelines for dog owners 

Photo courtesy of Professor Peter Irwin

Go to www.agriculture.gov.au/ehrlichiosis to learn more.

Is Chronic ehrlichiosis treatable?

Dogs with chronic ehrlichiosis have many different signs of disease. Infection with E.canis can look like other diseases 

such as pneumonia, some forms of cancer, other tick-borne diseases, and bleeding disorders including rodenticide 

poisoning. The disease is difficult or impossible to treat successfully.

Dogs may have a fever, be lethargic and lose weight, even if they are provided with plenty of food. Bleeding disorders 

include bloody noses, bleeding or bruising under the skin, or bleeding into the lungs, causing breathing difficulty. 

Large lymph nodes might be visible or felt as lumps under the jaw, in front of the shoulders and in the back legs. Eye 

abnormalities, including discharges and cloudy eyes, are common. Many dogs are lame or stiff.

Chronic ehrlichiosis gets progressively worse, because it becomes an autoimmune disease, where the tissues that 

produce both red and white blood cells are attacked from within the dog’s body. When a dog has complete immune 

system failure, it is usually fatal, regardless of treatment. Your veterinarian is likely to recommend blood tests to check 

disease progression. These tests will assess your dog’s immune system and organ function. The vet may recommend 

humane euthanasia, based on these blood test results and the severity of symptoms the dog is suffering.

Why does it matter if my dog is still infected?

Long-term management of potentially infected dogs poses a number of challenges:

•	 The number of subclinically infected dogs who go on to develop chronic ehrlichiosis is unknown. 

•	 Dogs who live in, or travel to, regions where E.canis–infected ticks exist may be bitten and subclinically infected 

without their owners’ knowledge, but go on to develop chronic ehrlichiosis months or years later. Because of the 

time delay, the connection between travel, tick bites and clinical signs may not be obvious.

•	 Subclinically infected dogs may move interstate into noninfected areas, and some of these dogs will develop 

chronic ehrlichiosis. Infected dogs can spread ehrlichiosis, so that the disease becomes established in areas that are 

currently free from the disease. This can happen if a dog is relocated to an area where brown dog ticks already exist, 

but the ticks are currently not infected with E.canis.

•	 The veterinary history of adopted or rescued dogs and the geographical areas that they have been in may not always 

be known to new owners or treating veterinarians. Gaining a complete understanding of a dog’s movement history 

can be difficult when dogs have passed through multiple owners or organisations.

Not knowing that a dog is infected with E.canis may result in delayed diagnosis or misdiagnosis. It could also result in 

disease spread and transmission to other dogs and communities that are currently free from the disease. Dog owners 

who travel with their pets and people who acquire dogs from areas where ehrlichiosis is known to occur need to be 

aware of these risks. 

For all these reasons, dogs who live in, travel through or are acquired from brown dog tick–infested areas of Australia 

should be provided with lifelong, continuous tick control. Kill-and-repel tick control products provide the best 

protection against tick attachment, and therefore protection from infection for individual dogs. 

To prevent transmission to other dogs, dogs with suspected or confirmed ehrlichiosis who live in an area where brown 

dog ticks are likely to exist need lifelong treatment with registered systemic tick control products, even where there are 

no ticks visible on the dog’s body. This will reduce the risk of disease in other dogs.

How do I protect my other dogs from infection?

There is no vaccine for ehrlichiosis. Use a registered product that both kills and repels ticks, at all times, for dogs that 

are at risk. This is the best protection against tick attachment. In brown dog tick–infested regions, if one of your dogs 

has potential or confirmed ehrlichiosis, prevent further transmission to other dogs in your household using registered 

systemic tick control products. Check dogs regularly for attached ticks, and keep long or fluffy coats clipped short so 

that you can find ticks more easily.

Reporting requirement

Ehrlichiosis is a notifiable disease. This means that a veterinarian who suspects or diagnoses the disease is legally 

required to report it to their state or territory animal biosecurity authority. You can find out more information on 

website Ehrlichiosis in dogs.1 

1 	https://www.agriculture.gov.au/ehrlichiosis

© Commonwealth of Australia, 2022.  

This publication is licensed by Commonwealth of Australia under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International licence. 

ABIO423.0622