Government Partnerships for Development Program and it will be delivered in Timor Leste from March
2014 to June 2016. The total funding for the program is $1.8 million of which the Department of
The program's main objective is to demonstrate effective poultry management strategies in a small
number of "pilot villages" in Timor Leste. Management and vaccination techniques for Newcastle
Disease demonstrated to be effective in improving village poultry production in Africa will be adapted
to the Timor Leste pilot villages. Useful techniques demonstrated through the pilot villages will be
communicated to other villages in Timor Leste using a targeted extension program.
The health of village poultry will also be protected by work to strengthen international border and
village biosecurity to reduce the reintroduction of poultry diseases into Timor Leste and its villages. The
program will be a partnership between the Timor Leste Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries (MAF),
Sydney’s Veterinary School. This biosecurity work will promote better understanding of the importance
of animal health at the village level in Timor Leste to improve poultry production outcomes.
The program supports both Timor Leste and Australian biosecurity interests. For Timor Leste the
program provides a practical demonstration to villagers the direct benefit of better biosecurity on
poultry health, welfare and production and improved food supply. Improved collaboration between
villages and government will support more effective disease surveillance systems. Increased village
poultry production will also support improved nutrition and prosperity for villagers.
A large percentage of the Timor Leste population are dependent on rural primary production. Food and
nutrition security is a continuing major challenge for Timor Leste. Subsistence agriculture is carried out
by up to 80% of the population, marketable surpluses are not always produced and certain times of the
year are marked by food scarcity in many villages. Timor Leste has high rates of malnutrition and child
stunting (Timor Leste is severely affected according to UNICEF current statistics for this nutritional
index). Increases in poultry production potentially will benefit some of the poorest members of the
community through increased availability of high quality protein from eggs and chicken meat.
Poultry are found in almost all villages in Timor Leste. Poultry are generally managed with minimal
inputs – birds search for scraps of food around the village. Poultry are consumed during special
occasions or sold for cash – eggs are not generally utilised due to availability and cost. Disease is
Newcastle disease regularly causes high village chicken mortalities. The impact of disease is such that
poultry numbers are kept at a level resulting in un-utilised food scraps in the village. In similar
situations in village poultry in Africa effective Newcastle disease vaccination has demonstrated
increased poultry production. A greater surety with regard to poultry survival also encourages greater
human inputs into poultry production as returns are more certain. Effective Newcastle disease

vaccination is achieved in the village situation by vaccination of 75 % of the village chicken flock every 4
months by administering a live vaccine by eye drop. There are a number of challenges associated with
achieving this level of vaccination including; proving to villages the advantages of vaccination,
sustainability of vaccine supply, maintaining the vaccine cold chain, catching 75% of free running
While Newcastle disease vaccination has been widely practiced in Timor Leste for many years, it is
thought to have been ineffective because the vaccine is not administered to a high enough percentage of
the village poultry flock often enough to build up the flock immunity sufficiently to stop circulation of
the virus. Maintaining an effective cold chain has been a challenge as power outages are common.
The improvement of other aspects of poultry production, such as biosecurity strengthening, better
management of birds and increased utilisation of eggs, will lead to additional benefits.
A crucial aspect of this program is engagement with a small number of "pilot" villages to increase their
knowledge of the benefit of effective Newcastle disease vaccination and to demonstrate the benefits of
The program will identify management techniques that will increase the production of village poultry.
The initial focus for production improvement will be through control of Newcastle disease by
vaccination. A program customised to each location will identify the strategies that work best.
These strategies will be implemented, supported, and then gradually handed over to the villagers to
maintain with support from MAF. A program of extension will then spread useful techniques to other
Village and international border biosecurity strengthening will support these strategies. The program
will assist MAF in strengthening its biosecurity policy and operations at the international border to
Women in developing countries play an important role in village poultry production. Engagement with
this demographic of the village is important for the success of this program. Sydney University will
partner with an international expert in social anthropology to better understand roles of men and

This information will ensure the Program is able to operate effectively in the village environment while
supporting an agenda of promoting the involvement of women. Village heads will be encouraged to
involve all sectors of the community with a role in poultry production including disabled villagers.
By the end of the program, vaccination and management techniques to increase small holder
Poultry production has increased in pilot villages (increased poultry numbers and production of
Pilot villages understand the benefits and continue to implement successful poultry raising
MAF extension officers have been trained in the successful poultry raising strategies
MAF extension activities are starting to disseminate this information and provide technical
support to other villages in Timor Leste (including mentoring of community vaccinators).
Pilot villages have greater knowledge of biosecurity techniques that can protect the health of their
MAF has improved knowledge on conducting an effective vaccination program for Newcastle
MAF has developed a draft annual budget for conducting an effective vaccination program for
Biosecurity policy has been reviewed and refined to better address poultry health risks posed by
movement of high risk goods through the land border with Indonesia. These policies have been
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/animal/health/timor-leste-village-poultry