Foreword and acknowledgements
Some amazingly detailed and scholarly accounts of the history of the veterinary profession have been 
written—but this is not one of them.
As a small booklet, this document can only paint the very broadest brushstrokes of the history 
of government veterinarians (vets) in Australia. This booklet also aims to celebrate the many 
achievements of government vets in Australia, and reveal the obstacles they faced, without—
hopefully—boring the reader to death. 
Some personal observations (in brackets) are scattered throughout the book to keep things interesting.
While an anecdotal history, this booklet refers to existing historical research, and uncovers a past 
which does government vets and the veterinary profession in general great credit.
and Forestry’s official contribution to celebrating World Veterinary Year in 2011.
Many people assisted with the production of this booklet by providing materials, comments, 
references and permissions. They include the following: state and territory Chief Veterinary Officers; 
staff and members of the Australian Veterinary Association and Australian Veterinary Historical Society; 
Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry.
I hope you enjoy A Veterinary Awakening. 
Dr Andy Carroll 
Chief Veterinary Officer (Australia) 
Delegate to the OIE (Australia)

© Commonwealth of Australia 2011
notice) for your personal, non-commercial use, or use within your organisation. Apart from any use as permitted under 
Canberra ACT 2601, Australia.
ISBN 978-1-921575-20-4

Contents
Section 1	
A brief world history of veterinary medicine—including demons and divine wrath	
5	
Section 2	
Australia’s early road to government veterinary services	
11
Section 3	
Early professional developments	
19
Section 4	
A new century brings change for government vets	
25
Section 5	
The golden era of veterinary research in the Twenties and Thirties	
37
Section 6	
The Second World War and the post-war era—new challenges for government vets	
47	
Section 7	
Government vets today and in the future	
57

5
Section 1 
The veterinary profession has come a long way over the 
past millennium.
Vets will be relieved to know that in 2011 it’s unlikely 
they’ll be required to chant incantations, make a ritual 
sacrifice, perform an exorcism or use any amulets, fetishes 
or totems—all legitimate animal healing practices in 
early times. Even following the appearance of veterinary 
surgeons in the 1700s, the use of magic to treat animals 
remained standard for animal doctors. 
What’s more, demons, divine wrath and metaphysical 
(occult) forces were blamed for pretty much every illness 
affecting domestic and wild animals. 
A brief world history of 
veterinary medicine—
including demons and  
divine wrath 
A treatment for sick cattle from the late tenth 
century Lacnunga (‘Remedies’)
T
ake the wort, put it upon gledes and fennel and hassuck 
and ‘cotton’ and incense. Burn all together on the side 
on which the wind is. Make it reek upon the cattle. Make 
five crosses of hassuck grass, get them on four sides of 
the cattle and one in the middle. Sing about the cattle the 
Benedicite and some litanies and the Pater Noster. Sprinkle 
holy water upon them, burn upon them incense and give the 
tenth penny in the Church for God, after that leave them to 
amend; do this thrice.

6
Thus, outbreaks of rinderpest in Europe during the Dark 
Ages were often attributed to the influence of earthquakes, 
floods and comets. Pity also the poor souls who followed 
the recommended seventeenth century occult cure for 
broken wind in horses—a mixture of toads, swallows and 
roasted moles! 
If the moon, stars and planets were not blamed for sickness, 
people looked next to demons and witches. Maleficia was 
the Latin term for a witch’s evil acts, the most common of 
which was inflicting disease upon humans or livestock. 
In Europe and America, from the fourteenth to eighteenth 
century, one of the first questions often asked about animal 
disease was whether it was natural or caused by a witch. 
Other influences on animal healing were Ancient Greek 
theories of humoral pathology and miasma. Miasma, a 
form of ‘bad air’, was thought to cause diseases such as 
cholera. In contrast, humoral pathology viewed disease  
as a result of disturbances of body juices—blood, mucus 
and bile. Standard treatment for the latter was ‘bleeding’, 
a practice which persisted into the nineteenth century and 
gave rise to doctors and vets being called ‘leeches’. 
While the Ancient Greeks contributed an investigative 
approach to explaining bodily structure and function, and 
developed comparative medicine, the idea of controlled 
scientific experiments would not appear until the nineteenth 
century.
Veterinary medicine goes along for  
the ride
From the first century AD until 1762, veterinary medicine 
developed mostly in conjunction with the growing military 
importance of the horse. However, while military efforts to 
maintain horse health contributed much to the development 
of veterinary medicine, military campaigns also frequently 
assisted disease spread during this period. 
T
he word ‘veterinarian’ comes from the Latin 
veterinae meaning ‘working animals’. In the first 
century, Columella, a Roman scholar and writer on 
animal care and breeding, used and recorded the term 
‘veterinarius’ for a person who takes care of pigs, sheep 
and cattle. The term ‘veterinarian’ was first used in 
print by Thomas Browne in 1646.
I
n Ancient Egypt, the goddess Sekhmet was worshipped 
as the ‘Lady of Pestilence’ who could either avert 
plague and cure disease or send plagues against those 
who angered her. 
Her priests—skilled healers of humans and animals—
coated her statues with anthrax to protect them from 
theft and vandalism.

7
The knowledge gained during this period was captured 
in hand-written texts which—following the invention of the 
printing press—were reproduced in print and became 
influential veterinary texts. The first of these appeared in 1528, 
and was a copy of Vegetius’ Mulomedicina—a comprehensive 
equine veterinary text produced around 500 AD. 
Vegetius’ work (see the text 
box) was a mix of magical, 
humoral and observation-
based treatments and 
theories. Another influential 
print text reproducing 
knowledge from the 
first century was the 
Hippiatrica—a collection 
of letters between vets 
(often also farriers), cavalry 
officers and castrators. The 
large number of similar 
texts produced, many on 
royal order, following the 
advent of the printing press 
illustrates the importance of 
the subject at the time.
...this Distemper 
proceeds from great 
Labour and Fatigue, if 
Negligence follows upon 
it. Sometimes...from too 
much violent Heat, or 
from being exposed to a 
vehement Cold, or from 
the crudity of his Food, 
or from a suddenly 
growing Cold after being 
in a Sweat, or from the 
heat of new Barley.
Hapsburg Empress Maria-Theresa desired a new class 
of qualified veterinarians in her realm but recognised 
that the Austrian public held animal workers in low 
esteem. To overcome this barrier, she issued a decree in 
1765 ordering punishment for anyone who opposed the 
teachers of the new veterinary profession.

8
A child of the Enlightenment: The first 
veterinary school
The eighteenth century Enlightenment, when reason 
and science began to usurp religion and magic in 
understanding the natural world, saw a more scientific 
approach to animal diseases. The Enlightenment also 
prompted the establishment of scientific academies in 
France, which promoted and organised new scientific 
disciplines—including veterinary science.
Along with the Enlightenment, another important impetus 
for the establishment of a veterinary school in France was 
animal disease outbreaks. Between 1710 and 1714, half 
the cattle in France were destroyed by rinderpest. More 
widely, the disease is thought to have reduced the cattle 
herds of Europe by several million in the early eighteenth 
century. There was public outcry, and most European 
states began to pressure their medical establishments for 
action. 
Since little was still known about rinderpest when France 
suffered another outbreak in 1750, in 1761 Claude 
Bourgelat was able to persuade King Louis XV of France 
that the medical profession’s efforts against the disease 
had failed. What was needed, Bourgelat argued, was a 
school producing trained veterinary specialists equipped 
with the scientific knowledge to combat rinderpest. 
The king agreed to the idea, and a royal decree was drawn 
up which pithily described the school as a place ‘where 
would be taught publicly the principles and the method 
to cure the diseases of livestock that would procure 
imperceptibly for the agriculture of the Realm the power to 
conserve livestock in times where this epidemic desolates 
the countryside.’ 
Having secured the king’s agreement (and a grant) to 
found the school, Bourgelat oversaw the establishment 
of the first permanent veterinary school in Lyon in 1762, 
and a second in Alfort in 1765. These French colleges of 
veterinary medicine were to produce a number of  
important veterinary leaders instrumental in widely 
disseminating veterinary science and germ theory. 
Over the next two decades, six similar veterinary schools 
were opened in Western Europe, and in 1791 the Royal 
Veterinary College opened in London. England’s first 
veterinary school proclaimed itself, ‘For the Improvement of 
Farriery and the Treatment of Cattle’ and was headed by a 
graduate and former teacher of the Alfort veterinary school. 
With the founding of the Royal Veterinary College in 
London, qualified vets there sought to distinguish 
themselves from unqualified competitors such as farriers, 
horse doctors, blood-letters, cow leeches and castrators. 
However, they were at first largely unsuccessful, prompting 
qualified army vet George Fleming to complain ‘Veterinary

9
surgeons are only too often… looked down upon as little, if 
at all, removed from the illiterate farrier or cow-leech…’
Even with the introduction in England of the Veterinary 
Surgeon’s Act in 1881, which regulated the use of the title 
‘veterinary surgeon’, the situation improved only slightly 
(Australia’s early veterinarians faced the same challenges, 
as will be seen in the next section). Throughout the 1800s 
scientific progress also failed to trickle down to the masses. 
Many European peasants and laymen clung to their belief 
that evil spirits caused animal disease, and that fire was an 
effective deterrent. 
Scientific developments in bacteriology, parasitology and 
immunology were important for the further development 
and enhanced credibility of the profession—and the 
development of government veterinary services. Thus, vets 
such as Johann Frank, Jacques de Solleysel, Erik Viborg, 
Frederick Brauell, Jean-Baptiste Auguste Chauveau and 
HMO Delafond contributed much to the understanding of 
infectious diseases, both human and animal, and to the 
veterinary services. 
T
he ‘father of modern pathology’, Rudolf Ludwig Karl 
Virchow of Schivelbein (Pomerania), coined the 
term ‘zoonosis’ to describe infections of animals that 
are in turn contagious to humans. Virchow founded the 
medical fields of cellular pathology and comparative 
pathology and was known for constantly urging his 
students to ‘think microscopically’.

10
1900 BC 	 Early Egyptian priest-healers record their 	
veterinary techniques in the Papyrus of Kahun 
500 AD  	 Vegetius compiles the Mulomedicina sine Ars 
Veterinaria using his own and earlier Greek and 
Latin writings
650 AD 	
Sun Yang writes one of the first Chinese 
veterinary medicine texts
800 AD 	
Bachar publishes the Book of Animals (Kitab 
El Chaiwan), the first book in Arabic collating 
veterinary information on the treatment of 
animals
1000 AD  The Hippiatrica—a Byzantine encyclopedia of 
horse medicine—is compiled by the Order of 
Constantine Porphyrogenitus
1500s  	
Propertees and Medcynes for a Horse and 
Mascal of Oxen, Horses, Sheepes, Hogges, 
Dogges is anonymously published, as well as 
John Fitzherbert’s Boke of Husbandrie (Book of 
Husbandry) 
1530  	
Rusius’ Hippiatria (the study/work of a horse 
doctor) is widely circulated in print 
1598  	
Ruini’s Anatomy of the Horse is published 
1761  	
The first veterinary school (in Lyon) is founded 
1791 	
The Royal Veterinary College is founded in 
London
1800s  	
The microscope reveals the world of microbes, 
and a scientific method for identifying larger 
disease organisms and their role in the disease 
process 
1802  	
Delabere Blaine writes the first English 
scientific exposition of veterinary medicine: 
Outlines of the Veterinary Art 
1865  	
Identifying divine wrath as the source of 
Britain’s rinderpest outbreak, Queen Victoria 
orders prayers to be made in every English 
church  
1867  	
Medicine (both human and veterinary) benefits 
from the introduction of antiseptics by Joseph 
Lister
1868  	
French veterinarians Jean Villemin and 
Auguste Chauveau prove the infectiousness of 
tuberculosis in animals
1881  	
The Veterinary Surgeon’s Act is passed in 
England and an anthrax vaccine is developed by 
Louis Pasteur
1882  	
Pasteur creates a rabies vaccine and Robert 
Koch discovers the tuberculosis bacillus
A highly selective timeline of early veterinary history

11
New Holland and animal disease 
In 1788, there were no veterinarians accompanying the 
First Fleet livestock brought around to New Holland—as 
Australia was then known. Six of the 18 000 convicts 
transported from around 1817 onwards gave their 
occupation as veterinary surgeon. However, it’s unlikely that 
they were qualified vets (as vets are known to be people of 
strong moral fibre and hardly likely to steal a loaf of bread).
While qualified vets may have been absent, 
early colonists would have included farriers, 
farmers with animal husbandry skills, equine 
enthusiasts and stock breeders. On travelling 
to New Holland, they would have brought with 
them popular veterinary texts of the day such as 
The Gentlemen’s Farriery and The Family Horse 
Doctor. 
Fortunately for Australia, despite diseases such 
as rinderpest ravaging Europe during the 1800s, 
not many animals were shipped from there to 
the New South Wales colony (New Holland’s 
largest colony) before 1820. Instead, shorter 
voyages were made from southern Africa, India 
and parts of South-East Asia. This meant that it 
wasn’t until the 1850s that the colonies began to 
feel the effects of diseases introduced from the 
‘old-world’. 
Section 2 
Australia’s early road to 
government veterinary 
services 
West coast Tasmania, town festival in the early days. Archives Office of Tasmania.  
ADRI AB713-1-3950.

12
Thus, in 1800, Governor Philip Gidley King of New South 
Wales could report that, ‘where sheep were taken care of 
they do very well’ and in 1806 that ‘No cattle in the world 
are less liable to disease than those in New South Wales.’
The gold rushes of the 1850s, however, greatly spurred 
migration and trebled Australia’s population within 
a decade. Before then, the impact of more serious 
infectious diseases and parasites was limited by extensive 
(rather than intensive) livestock farming, and Australia’s 
geographic isolation and unique ecosystems. But the rapid 
growth of Australia’s population required more imports of 
livestock and their products, and more intensive livestock 
production. The development of refrigerated shipping 
also created rapid expansion in the dairy and beef export 
industries, although mishaps continued to result in some 
extremely rancid loads of meat and dairy arriving in 
England.
Unfortunately, with all these developments came disease, 
and while livestock quarantine laws were enacted in the 
1870s, this was too little, too late. Consequently, imported 
livestock and products brought with them to Australia 
tuberculosis, bovine pleuro-pneumonia, foot and mouth 
disease, anthrax and a host of other diseases. 
Scab here, there, everywhere
There was one livestock disease that did manage to make 
itself unwelcome very early in the history of the colonies—
sheep scab.
It’s thought that the first 44 sheep brought to Australia 
carried scab and footrot. By 1832 sheep scab was such 
a problem that legislation was passed for its control in 
New South Wales. This was Australia’s first animal disease 
legislation. 
Essentially, the Scab Act 1832 prohibited the owners of 
infested sheep from turning them out onto others’ property 
or driving them on any road. Under the legislation, male 
convicts found guilty of this could be ‘worked in irons on 
the roads for up to six months’!
With outbreaks of sheep scab continuing to threaten the 
wool industry, other states also enacted scab legislation. 
Then, as legislation evolved, the colonies appointed 
scab inspectors with powers to inspect, detain, seize and 
destroy infected sheep. 
FACT: Between 1830 and 1850 the value of 
Australian wool exports increased from  
£2 million to £41 million!

13
The problems with scab in the colonies did not lead 
pastoralists or the government to seek veterinary 
assistance. Somewhat of a law unto themselves, the 
oligarchy of wealthy graziers with vast properties and 
huge herds preferred to solve livestock problems in their 
own way—and ways compatible with their extensive 
livestock production, based on economies of scale. A 
prime example of this was their approach to the sheep 
scab problem. Instead of employing vets or shepherds to 
control scab, pastoralists instead invented acaricides, dips, 
races and drafting gates which allowed the treatment of 
thousands of sheep daily. 
As a powerful group, pastoralists also easily effected 
legislative change, and were responsible for many acts and 
bills being introduced to protect their interests. Legislation 
steered by a wealthy pastoralist through the New South 
Wales Parliament in 1864 saw dipping made compulsory. 
This was regulated by the establishment of a permanent 
scab inspectorate funded by scab fees collected from 
pastoralists. 
These moves—quickly imitated by other colonies—led to 
the eradication of sheep scab in 1896 from the continent, 
and Australia’s first successful disease eradication. It was 
a low-tech affair, and mainly successful due to producer 
cooperation and the enforcement of legislation initiated 
by high-handed pastoralists. However, these measures 
were to become the foundation of animal disease control 
in Australia, and the government veterinary services. Scab 
inspectorates eventually grew into stock branches as their 
disease control roles expanded. Stock branches would 
later require the help of vets to tackle more serious animal 
diseases.
As a result of this development, instead of a state veterinary 
service like those in Europe, each Australian colony had a 
government ‘stock branch’, headed by a Chief Inspector 
of Stock. These were laymen rather than vets, and their 
attitude in general towards vets is best summed up by the 
withering comment of Victoria’s Chief Inspector of Stock, 
Edward Curr, about ‘the worthlessness of professional 
knowledge’. 
Spare a thought for the scab inspector…
S
cab inspectors were sometimes deeply unpopular 
people. Upon his appointment, William Dumbleton 
was described as ‘disqualified for the office because of… 
his absolute ignorance of diseases of sheep’. Similarly, the 
Adelaide Chronicle said of sheep brought into Adelaide 
‘they are a mass of disease and yet this is allowed 
notwithstanding the appointment of an Inspector of 
Scab (who bye the bye (sic) does not know a scabby 
sheep from a clean one)’.

14
Australia’s first scab inspector appears to have been 
William Dumbleton, appointed under the Scab Act 1840. 
A former butcher, Dumbleton was paid roughly £27 every 
three months. This seems slight reward, considering that in 
1856, South Australia’s handful of scab inspectors visited 
35 sheep stations, inspected 186 274 sheep and travelled 
1622 miles by horse. 
Australia’s pioneer vets 
The livestock industries—wool, in 
particular—were largely responsible 
for the growth and prosperity of 
Australia in the nineteenth century. 
Yet it was nearly a century after 
the First Fleet arrived before 
governments employed veterinary 
surgeons to prevent and control 
livestock disease. 
For most of the 1800s, the colonial 
governments would overlook the 
advice of the veterinary profession in 
favour of that of medical experts, who 
were viewed as a more respectable 
and reliable profession. 
During this period, vets were also disadvantaged by the 
appointment of lay chief inspectors of stock to manage 
colony livestock matters. 
The lack of veterinary influence was partly due to the small 
number of qualified veterinarians in the colonies—there 
were fewer than 50 qualified vets practicing in the whole of 
Australia in 1880. However, before the 1880s, the veterinary 
profession had also yet to establish 
itself and its credibility in Australia. 
Unlike Europe, New Holland’s colonies 
had no professional association of 
veterinarians, no veterinary journals, 
or any educational institution offering 
a veterinary degree course. Even 
worse, there was no regulation of who 
could call themselves a veterinary 
surgeon and practice under that title. 
As a consequence, ‘quacks’ calling 
themselves vets abounded. In addition, 
there was a common belief that the 
expertise of vets was limited to horses. 
Despite these barriers, the government 
stock branches did consult vets on 
occasion, and some of the earliest of 
these advisers to the government are 
described over the page. Note that these 
early vets were real hybrids—part private 
practitioner and part government vet.
Mr John Stewart. Mitchell Library, State Library 
of NSW; gpo_082051

15
Australia’s first qualified veterinarian surgeon is thought 
to be John Stewart, who stepped off the boat and onto 
Sydney Cove in 1841. He set up private practice in Sydney 
which he ran in conjunction with a horse bazaar (market).  
A former professor of veterinary medicine in Glasgow, he 
was the author of two books before arriving in Australia: 
Advice to Purchasers of Horses and Stable Economy. 
He also acted as an adviser to the New South Wales 
Government on a mysterious new murrain1—Cumberland 
disease. 
Cumberland disease was first reported in 1847, south-west 
of Sydney in Cumberland County, and was named after that 
area. Sheep died rapidly from the strange new disease, 
as did some of the men who disposed of the carcasses. 
The carcasses were markedly bloated and decomposed 
rapidly; the livers were ‘a mass of rotten matter’. When 
a commission of enquiry was established in 1851, John 
Stewart was appointed a member. Probably due to 
Stewart’s input, the commission recognised Cumberland 
disease as being similar to Germany’s deadly Milzbrand 
and France’s maladie du sang. They recommended that 
infected flocks and herds be prohibited from travel, and the 
carcasses of dead infected animals burned. Cumberland 
disease would later be identified as anthrax by another vet, 
Graham Mitchell.
1 Murrain literally means ‘death’ and was used in medieval times to refer 
to highly infectious diseases of cattle and sheep. Oddly, the word is also 
used in Australian newspapers as late as 1905.
The Cumberland disease inquiry was significant in that it 
marked the first occasion that the government in Australia 
officially called upon veterinary surgeons for advice. Sadly, 
however, the effect of this on subsequent disease control 
had all the impact of a flogging with a limp lettuce, as the 
following events show.
Pleuro strikes
The introduction of contagious bovine pleuro-pneumonia 
(‘pleuro’ for short) to Australia started with a shorthorn 
heifer called St Bees. Quite the beauty, St Bees was 
imported from London in 1858 to Melbourne, where she 
became the first diagnosed case of pleuro in Australia. 
Henry Wragge, a consulting government vet, identified  
St Bees’ symptoms as pleuro (both pre- and post-mortem) 
and recommended that she and her herd be slaughtered. 
However, this suggestion wasn’t at all popular with the herd 
owner, and with neither law nor public opinion at his back to 
support him, Wragge’s advice was ignored. 
When, 11 months later, it was decided to slaughter out 
the dying herd, vets Pottie, Miscamble and Gribton all 
confirmed pleuro by post-mortem examination. Then, 
in 1860, pleuro broke out on a neighbouring property, 
signalling the start of the most devastating livestock 
disease in Australia—a disease which would eventually 
cost many millions in lost livestock, restricted export 
opportunities and disease control measures.

16
Unable to resist snubbing vets, (like some people are 
unable to resist an extra biscuit at tea time) those in charge 
of organising the 1864 royal commission into pleuro did not 
appoint any vets. The vet-less commission then concluded 
(wrongly) that pleuro was not contagious or infectious, and 
that preventive inoculation was useless. 
The subsequent rapid spread of pleuro had one benefit 
in that it spurred the governments of New South Wales, 
Victoria, Queensland and Tasmania to further appoint 
practising veterinarians as government consultants or 
inspectors. 
Victorian pioneer vet, Graham Mitchell, was one person 
who strongly disagreed with the royal commission’s 
findings. Mitchell found pleuro virus in the lungs of 
destroyed cattle and also performed successful inoculation 
experiments. Together with John Miscamble, Mitchell 
pioneered inoculation in Victoria. 
The two vets experimentally refined Willem’s tail inoculation 
technique and successfully inoculated herds. Their 
success with herd inoculation drew the attention of farmers 
and alerted them to the benefits of inoculation. Mitchell 
later sold his pleuro inoculating lymph for £2 per 100 head 
of cattle—a reasonable price in those days.
Forced to grudgingly recognise Mitchell’s expertise with 
pleuro and other diseases, the Victorian Government 
appointed Mitchell a government vet in 1873 under the 
Diseases of Stock Act 1872. With his appointment, Mitchell 
helped ensure that reasonable control measures for pleuro 
were implemented in Victoria. However, while Mitchell’s 
appointment greatly benefitted animal health in Australia, 
it was a difficult time for him. There was little love lost 
between Mitchell and Victorian Chief Inspector of Stock, 
Edward Curr (and the advice he provided on veterinary 
matters was about as welcome as boils).
The foot and mouth disease scare
It was fortunate that there were government vets present, 
albeit not full-time ones, when the first confirmed cases 
of foot and mouth disease (FMD) occurred in Australia. In 
1871 and 1872, cattle imported to New South Wales were 
identified by government vet John Pottie as FMD infected 
and kept in quarantine for several months. Victoria also had 
an outbreak in 1872 on two farms, and the government-
appointed inspection party included three vets. The party 
agreed on slaughtering-out and disinfecting both farms 
which was effective in eradicating the outbreak. 
Mitchell’s subsequent actions also ensured quarantine 
measures were put in place. When Mitchell earlier 
drafted a list of animal diseases likely to be imported into 
Australia with stock, and urged the government for routine 
quarantine inspection of stock, he was ignored. When he 
diagnosed a case of FMD in cattle at Werribee in 1872,

17
Curr refused to pass on the diagnosis to the minister, 
and told Mitchell his services were no longer needed. 
Deploring what he saw as inadequate disease prevention 
and response, Mitchell—rather naughtily—reported his 
diagnosis of FMD to Melbourne newspaper The Argus. 
Following the resulting public outcry, a total prohibition 
on the importation of cattle sheep and pigs from England 
into Victoria was imposed for seven years. While Mitchell’s 
action was effective, it did not endear him to Curr, who 
would have preferred to keep the outbreak out of the 
media, and Mitchell in his place.
The effective response of hybrid government-private vets 
such as Stewart, Pottie and Mitchell to various disease 
outbreaks contributed much to changing government 
perceptions about the usefulness of the veterinary 
profession. While previously regarded as ‘horse doctors’, 
their assistance with diseases of sheep, pigs and cattle saw 
them regarded anew as a profession concerned with all 
livestock health. They also assisted colonial governments 
to recognise the value of veterinary inspection and advice 
in preventing the spread of infectious animal disease. In 
addition, while probably not invited to any high society tea 
parties, the appointment of vets as government consultants 
did increase their social and professional status.
However, in order to gain greater influence over what they 
considered to be properly veterinary matters (disease 
control and quarantine policy) vets would first have to 
raise the status of the profession in the colonies, and their 
numbers!
Q
ueensland’s first qualified veterinarian was James 
Irving, who migrated and settled in Brisbane in 
1873. Due to the shortage of medical services in that area, 
Irving often treated human patients who couldn’t find a 
doctor! In 1881 Irving became Queensland’s government 
veterinarian which saw him advise the colony’s police 
and postal department, and the Brisbane Tramway 
Company. He was also involved in government disease 
investigations and was an inspector of dairies for the city 
of Brisbane.

18
Australia’s first veterinary school students, in front of the Melbourne Veterinary College with patients (circa 1883).  
Photo courtesy of the University of Melbourne Archives.

19
The Colonies get a veterinary college 
and an association
When William Tyson Kendall arrived in Victoria in 1880, he 
observed that there were no more than a dozen qualified 
veterinary surgeons practicing in Victoria, but that every 
shoeing forge called itself a ‘veterinary shoeing forge’.
Kendall, along with Graham Mitchell and several other 
qualified vets in Australia, had the following to say about 
the Australian veterinary profession in 1881: 
‘A large proportion of the stockowners and farmers have 
had no previous experience of the management of stock 
in countries or parts where veterinary surgeons were 
available, consequently they have had but a very imperfect 
knowledge of the utility of the profession and those who 
have endeavoured to obtain the services of veterinary 
surgeons have been so frequently imposed upon by men 
practicing under assumed titles that they have been led to 
form very unjust opinions of it.
The Colonial Government being chiefly composed of a 
similar class of men has led to the employment of laymen 
and medical men in what are the legitimate duties of the 
veterinary surgeons only. At the present time there is not a 
single veterinary surgeon in the Australian colonies wholly 
employed in government service. All stock inspection is 
done by lay inspectors, except in doubtful cases where 
there is great difficulty and heavy responsibility. Then the 
veterinary surgeon is called in.’ 
Section 3
Early professional 
developments

20
The present state of veterinary progress in these colonies is 
therefore similar to what it was in England fifty years ago…’2
To remedy this sad situation, vets set about 
professionalising veterinary medicine in Australia. Due 
to their efforts, in 1880 the first Australian veterinary 
association was formed—the 
Australasian Veterinary Medical 
Association. The association’s 
president, Mitchell, and secretary, 
Kendall, also began publishing The 
Australasian Veterinary Journal in 1882. 
The Australasian Veterinary Medical 
Association, with members from the 
various colonies and New Zealand, actively campaigned 
for the establishment of an Australian veterinary school. 
It also sought legislation granting qualified vets exclusive 
right to the title of ‘veterinary surgeon’. 
Both aims were accomplished—in 1887 the Veterinary 
Surgeons Act was proclaimed and in 1888 six students 
2 Report on Veterinary Science and Practice in Australia. Mitchell, Kendall, 
Stewart, Chalwin et al. Veterinarian (London) September 1881.
enrolled in the Melbourne Veterinary College, a private 
institution founded by Kendall. For the bargain price 
of 100 guineas, applicants could enrol in the four-year 
course offering subjects such as veterinary hygiene, meat 
inspection, materia medica, shoeing and morbid anatomy. 
The Victorian Secretary for Agriculture pronounced himself 
thrilled with the college’s efforts, and even more thrilled at 
the prospect of having qualified inspectors for the proper 
supervision of export livestock and meat.
Aside from being instrumental in the establishment of 
Australia’s first veterinary college, first national veterinary 
association and first veterinary legislation, 
Kendall should also be remembered for his 
contribution to disease control. He was, to a 
large degree, responsible for the instigation 
of a royal commission enquiry into bovine 
tuberculosis which saw the disease added 
to the Stock Diseases Act. He also drew 
attention to the dangers of spreading 
tuberculosis through pleuro inoculation 
and was successful in controlling (within three months!) 
Australia’s first reported outbreak of swine fever. 
Kendall also promoted animal welfare by establishing an 
animal hospital in 1885 in Fitzroy. These achievements  
probably far exceeded Kendall’s hopes and expectations 
at age 12, when he announced to his family his decision to 
become a vet.
J
L Burns failed his first Melbourne Veterinary College 
exam because ‘he was too well dressed and no one with 
gloves and cane could examine horses and cattle.’ WAN 
Robertson, 1936
M
iss Belle Bruce Reid was 
Australia’s first woman to 
graduate in veterinary science, 
receiving her degree from 
Melbourne Veterinary College 
in 1906.

21
His contemporary and fellow Victorian, Graham Mitchell, 
also achieved much in his time. Having spent three years 
in India where he witnessed diseases such as FMD up 
close, he was a strong and vocal public advocate of 
veterinary inspection and quarantining of all imported 
stock. Incredibly, however, when he correctly identified 
Cumberland disease as anthrax in an 1877 booklet, and 
described its infectious danger to humans, authorities 
derided his diagnosis and stressed the non-contagious 
nature of Cumberland disease! Chief Inspector of Stock, 
Edward Curr, insisted that the disease was ‘fluke under a 
peculiar aspect’ and allowed the sale of diseased sheep to 
continue, as well as the skinning of carcasses. 
Mitchell and Curr’s disagreement over quarantine and 
disease matters, and their mutual disdain for one another, 
became venomous in an exchange of letters published in 
The Argus over anthrax. In one such letter, Mitchell refers 
to ‘the unsatisfactory nature of reports emanating from the 
Stock department’ and invites pastoralists to instead report 
cases of anthrax to him for investigation! 
Sadly, the poor relationship between Curr and Mitchell 
typified the general mistrust at the time of laymen towards 
science (including veterinary science). Thus, despite 
the excellent disease investigation work and research of 
early vets such as Mitchell and others, their influence was 
restricted by the prevailing attitudes of those in power. 
To fully address the growing anthrax and pleuro outbreaks 
in the colonies, vets would need to change government 
attitudes towards the role of science in disease control.
Bacteriology and Cumberland disease 
Despite John Stewart’s advice in 1851 and Graham 
Mitchell’s investigations published in 1870, in the 1880s 
many still believed anthrax (or Cumberland disease as it 
was known) to be caused by toxic weeds or liver fluke. 
Besides being an impressive display of ignorance, this 
thinking also meant that anthrax control was poor in many 
areas. As a consequence, Australia’s first major disease 
of cattle spread largely unchecked during the forty years 
it was poorly understood, and thousands of cattle, sheep 
and horses died.
A plate from Graham Mitchell’s book on Cumberland disease

22
In a worsening of the disease, in 1885 alone, over 40 000 
sheep died on pastoralist Arthur Devlin’s properties in New 
South Wales. Following reports of the high mortalities, the 
New South Wales Chief Inspector of Stock had government 
vet Edward Stanley investigate. Stanley and his predecessor, 
Anthony Willows, were among the first full-time government 
vets in Australia. 
When Stanley visited Devlin’s property, milkweed was 
pointed to as the suspected culprit. Stanley, however, 
found anthrax bacilli through post-mortem examination. 
A pro-active government vet, Stanley felt it important to 
convince the property owners of the real cause of the 
disease. In a demonstration, he drenched six healthy 
sheep with the blood of one of the dead sheep. Within  
40 hours, five of the six sheep were dead and Stanley had 
made his point that the milkweed was innocent. He also 
left Arthur Devlin a copy of Klein’s bacteriology publication 
Micro-organisms and Disease. Published in 1884, it was 
cutting edge reading in microbiological science at the time. 
Not yet done, Stanley also conveyed to Chief Inspector 
of Stock, Alexander Bruce, the scale of the fatalities and 
convinced him to look into preventative vaccination as 
a control option. He also recommended a government 
reward be offered for development of an anthrax vaccine. 
(It is somewhat baffling that there is no Australian currency 
or stamps with Stanley’s face plastered on them, since his 
work certainly deserves recognition.) 
The work of Edward Stanley and other vets demonstrated 
to both pastoralists and the government that science—in 
the form of bacteriology and vaccination—could usefully be 
applied to combat livestock diseases. However, Australian 
access to bacteriological expertise was limited—until the 
visit of the Pasteur Mission.
Rabbits, disease and Pasteur’s 
nephew come to town
Strangely, it was not anthrax or pleuro that first lured 
European microbiological expertise to Australia, but the 
rabbit plague. 
In 1887, the New South Wales Government offered 
a £25 000 prize for a biological means of destroying 
rabbits. At the time, Pasteur needed money to fund his 
establishment of the Pasteur Institute, so his sudden 
and intense interest in Australia’s rabbit problem was 
convenient for everyone.
W
hen government vet Edward Stanley gave pastoralist 
Arthur Devlin a bacteriology publication, little did 
he know that Devlin would become a bacteriology devotee, 
devouring every book on the subject. The Pasteur Institute 
later visited Devlin’s Uarah property and anthrax vaccine 
trials were carried out at his Junee property. Arthur Devlin 
even became a vaccinator for New South Wales. Sometimes 
a little government vet extension work goes a long way…

23
In 1888 three representatives of the Pasteur Mission set sail 
for Australia: Adrien Loir—Pasteur’s assistant and nephew, 
Dr Louis Germont and English interpreter, Dr Frank Hinds. 
Loir states in his memoirs that during the voyage he learnt 
English by chatting with the husband of famous Australian 
opera soprano, Dame Nellie Melba.
During the stay, the relationship between the Pasteur 
Mission and Australia was tempestuous (with more 
misunderstandings and disagreements than the average 
soap opera romance). To cut things short, the institute 
missed out on the £25 000 rabbit eradication prize but 
did develop and eventually produce anthrax vaccine in 
Australia until 1898. Loir also devised a vaccine for pleuro 
and trialled it at the Indooroopilly Sheep Quarantine 
Grounds in 1889. The Pasteur Mission’s production of 
anthrax vaccine ceased following the success of another 
commercially produced anthrax vaccine. John McGarvie 
Smith, an Australian bacteriologist, developed a safer, one-
dose anthrax vaccine in the 1890s in partnership with John 
Alexander Gunn. 
The main benefit of the Pasteur Mission’s visit to Australia 
and establishment of laboratories was the exposure of 
pastoralists, scientists and governments to microbiological 
science. As more learnt about bacteriology, they began 
to see the benefits of having scientific experts on hand to 
wage war against livestock disease. 
As a result, at the 1889 Intercolonial Stock Conference 
colony representatives proposed the creation of an 
Australasian Stock Institute for bacteriological research. 
The idea was that the institute would be used to develop 
local scientific capacity—by conducting applied research 
and teaching microbiology to Australian students. Why 
import French bacteriologists when you could grow your 
own experts at home?
However, the proposal never eventuated because 1890 was 
the start of a decade of bank crashes and frozen foreign 
investment in Australia. This—together with production 
losses due to rabbits, drought and overstocking—saw 
proposals for the creation of animal disease research 
facilities quickly crushed. The situation for veterinary 
research was not to improve for another decade.
The only exception to this freeze was the establishment 
of the Queensland Stock Institute in Brisbane in 1893. 
It became the first government research institution 
established in Australia purely for the purpose of 
investigating animal disease.
English bacteriologist Charles Joseph Pound, a former 
Pasteur Institute student, was appointed director. Pound 
produced cultivated pleuro virus for inoculation which was 
widely distributed in Queensland. One newspaper later 
described him as ‘the boffin who saved the cattle industry’ 
for his work on tick fever.

24
Pound began to investigate the ‘redwater’ disease among 
cattle in Australia’s north in 1894. He quickly realised that 
it was carried by ticks and published this information in a 
book—Redwater disease in cattle in the Gulf district. When 
redwater disease first appeared in Queensland, up to 90 
per cent of cattle in some areas died and it was estimated 
that some £3 million worth of cattle were lost during the first 
six years of the disease.
Pound worked with an American expert on tick fever—JS 
Hunt—to carry out inoculation trials in Australia. Once a 
method for producing tick fever vaccine from the blood of 
infected cattle was developed, Pound then also developed 
the multiple injection ‘Pound syringe’ for commercial sale. 
Known to be tireless in educating stockowners about the 
need for protective inoculation, Pound is thought to have 
saved hundreds of thousands of cattle from tick fever 
death with his campaign of lectures, demonstrations and 
publications. A tick fever research station established 
in Wacol in 1966 is named after Pound in honour of his 
achievements. 
Charles Joseph Pound. John Oxley Library, 
State Library of Queensland, negative 
number 161074

25
Would you like some hygiene with that 
food?
As a result of the increasing impact of livestock diseases 
in the late nineteenth century—and the successes of 
government vets and bacteriologists in combating these 
diseases—by the 1890s all the colonies had disease 
control legislation and government stock branches with 
either full-time or consulting government vets. While not 
all chief inspectors of stock were enamoured 
of vets, vets had certainly established their 
somewhat limited place within stock branches.
Social change at the end of the nineteenth 
century then created further changes for 
government vets. Social activism in England, 
Australia and the United States of America saw 
protest groups (including trade unions and 
suffragettes) lobby the government strongly for 
safe food. This politicisation of food safety, along 
with government reforms, led to food safety 
legislation being developed for the first time.
Most Australian colonies introduced legislation 
to prohibit the sale of diseased food in the 
1880s. Government vets around the country 
rubbed their hands in glee, as—by providing 
assurance that food animals and products were 
free from diseases— veterinary meat and dairy 
inspectors became some of the first public 
health officials in Australia. 
Section 4
A new century brings 
change for government 
vets
Government vet transport at the turn of the century. (Man in sulky, Macksville, NSW. 
Mitchell Library, State Library of NSW; bcp_04594)

26
Also, as germ theory became more accepted—and meat 
and milk were identified as sources of tuberculosis and 
other disease infection—new food safety requirements 
evolved. The United Kingdom required all imported 
meat to be inspected under veterinary supervision, and 
all Australian colonies enacted the Livestock and Meat 
Export Act of 1895. To meet the export meat inspection 
requirements, more full-time government vets were 
appointed.
Then, in 1896 Samuel 
Cameron became 
Veterinary Inspector for the 
Victorian Board of Public 
Health. This appointment 
made him one of the 
first vets to become an 
inspector in Australia. 
With his passion for meat 
hygiene, Cameron was 
also largely responsible 
for creating the Meat 
Supervision Act of Victoria 1901, which regulated—for 
the first time—the slaughtering of cattle for domestic 
consumption. This legislation followed a report to the 
Victorian government that the high rate of tuberculosis in 
the colony was largely due to infected meat.
Cameron also drafted, and was pivotal in having enacted, 
the Milk and Dairy Supervision Act 1905. (Latte lovers thus 
have government vets like Cameron to thank that their latte 
art—the swirly milk shape on the surface—is tubercle free.)
With the growing public concern about food safety, the 
New South Wales Board of Health also appointed two 
vets as inspectors in 1896, and Weir was made Inspector 
of Stock in Western Australia. Once in power, these vets 
quickly recruited more vets to staff their departments. Thus, 
when Edward Stanley became Chief Veterinary Inspector of 
the New South Wales Board 
of Health in 1892, more vets 
were employed there than 
in the Stock Branch of New 
South Wales!
It was clear, then, that towards 
the end of the nineteenth 
century, vets were poised to 
finally wrest control of animal 
disease matters away from 
doctors, pastoralists and 
laymen. This development 
continued when, in 1902, the appointment of stock 
inspectors by local stock boards (mainly pastoralists) 
ceased. Under the new system of examination, the first 
successful examinee to become a stock inspector was a vet. 
The role of food safety appears to have played an important 
role in the great government vet revolution. Sadly, however, 
in accounts of Australian history, the birth of food safety 
M
azyck Porcher Ravenel should be remembered for 
his temerity in contradicting the view of the famous 
Robert Koch that bovine tuberculosis posed little threat 
to humans. Ravenel, at the International Conference of 
Tuberculosis in 1901, stated clearly his view that Koch was 
wrong, and that a human could be infected with bovine 
tuberculosis (for example, through drinking infected milk). 
Disagreement on the subject continued worldwide for 
many years.

27
measures is often overshadowed by Federation, so take a 
moment to dwell on it before reading on. 
The profession grows up as the 
colonies get federated
In the 1890s, we saw, livestock disease problems were 
mounting in Australia. Anthrax was widespread, cattle 
tick fever was a serious problem in Queensland, pleuro 
and bovine tuberculosis were ubiquitous, and rabbits 
had become problematic. At the same time, the livestock 
industries were expanding, in particular, the beef and dairy 
industries. Thus, by 1900, Australia’s dairy herd numbered 
1.4 million and some 90 per cent of milk went into butter 
and cheese production. Most of this product was exported 
to Britain.
However, the government, public and pastoralists were 
also at last beginning to appreciate the benefits that vets 
and science could bring to the livestock industries and 
public health. Bacteriology, inoculation and vaccine were 
viewed as potential answers to many problems. The end 
of the nineteenth century was also the beginning of more 
government vets, as food safety required more veterinary 
meat and dairy inspection.
To get a broader perspective of life in Australia at the start 
of the new century, one should remember that horses 
were still the main form of transport, home electricity was 
not yet common and women’s skirts were big—really 
big—(see the 1890s bustle on this page). Also, up until 
Federation in 1901, Australia’s colonies were independently 
self-governing and tended to squabble like siblings. 
Newspapers before Federation are full of accounts of 
colony rivalry, jealousies and disputes. Under these 
conditions it would have been very difficult to undertake 
national livestock research or animal health programs. 
Bigger than an 1890s bustle, then, was the Commonwealth 
quarantine legislation enacted in 1908. It resulted in state 
and territory Chief Inspectors 
of Stock being appointed 
Commonwealth Chief 
Quarantine Officers—who 
then all had to agree on how 
to jointly administer the new 
legislation for national animal 
health outcomes. 
In the 1800s, intercolonial 
conferences had seen 
ministers of agriculture and 
chief inspectors of stock meet 
regularly to discuss disease 
and quarantine matters. 
However, it was still quite an 
achievement that the 1909 
meeting of chief inspectors of 
1890s bustle

28
stock managed to agree (with minimal hair pulling) upon a 
uniform system for administering the Quarantine Act 1908.
Perhaps agreement was facilitated by the happy presence 
of many vets—by 1909 vets had managed to find their way 
into the chief inspector position in New South Wales (JD 
Stewart), Victoria (SS Cameron) and Western Australia (RE 
Weir). 
Veterinary research flourishes in 
Australia (at last) 
The chief inspectors of stock, particularly JD Stewart, 
repeatedly called for the establishment of a government 
laboratory with a chemist, animal pathologist and 
bacteriologist to undertake expert research on local stock 
diseases. In response to Stewart’s expert badgering, the 
New South Wales Government established the Government 
Bureau of Microbiology in 1908.
The same year saw Kendall’s private Melbourne Veterinary 
College taken over by Melbourne University (much to 
Kendall’s financial relief) to establish a faculty of veterinary 
science at that university. Up to this time, Kendall’s 
college had produced Australia’s first 57 veterinary 
degree graduates—largely due to his personal efforts in 
establishing, funding and running the college. Kendall 
became a lecturer at the newly established veterinary 
school, while Scotsman John (Jock) Anderson Gilruth was 
appointed as Dean. Part of the university’s newly formed 
JD Stewart. Photo courtesy of Dr Frank 
Doherty, Hon. Archivist, AVA

29
veterinary school, the Veterinary Research Institute at 
Parkville, was formed the following year. One of the 
school’s graduates, Herbert Seddon, undertook research at 
the new facility on bovine brucellosis, which JD Stewart had 
identified in dairy cows in coastal New South Wales. 
Not to be outdone by Victoria, Queensland opened the 
Stock Experiment Station Complex (now known as the 
Animal Research Institute) in 1909. Bacteriologist CJ 
Pound (the boffin who saved the cattle industry) was made 
director and during his time there, the facility dispatched 
34 219 doses of tick fever vaccine, 726 634 doses of pleuro 
vaccine and 25 500 doses of blackleg vaccine. 
South Australia then established its first veterinary research 
laboratory in 1910, in an extension built onto Royal Adelaide 
Hospital. A section of the newly built Institute for Medical 
and Veterinary Research was given the name of Government 
Laboratory for Bacteriology and Pathology. In 1912, a young 
Lionel Batley Bull joined the laboratory and over the next 
22 years published 33 papers while working there, before 
becoming a public figure working for the CSIRO. 
The veterinary school at the University of Sydney also 
opened in 1910, and expert badgerer and former Chief 
Inspector of Stock, JD Stewart, was appointed chair of the 
new school. It was the perfect position for Stewart to carry 
out his moulding of Australia’s future veterinary leaders.
It was to be a busy two decades for Stewart who, in 
addition to grooming vet students for future government 
glory, also became President of the Australian Veterinary 
Association (formed in 1921), and later secured the 
passage of the 1923 Veterinary Surgeons Act which 
regulated the profession in New South Wales. 
The government vet’s best friend in the early 
1900s—the horse
A
rthur Ernest Moore was a vet and stock inspector for 
the district of Port Stephens in New South Wales from 
1912. In an interview published by the Gloucester District 
Historical Society he recounted:
‘In the early years I rode the whole district on horseback, 
and later had two horses in a sulky and outrigger, carrying 
a bridle and saddle in the sulky. Later again I changed 
to a buggy, and as the duties became more exacting and 
demanding, I purchased my first car—a Dodge—in 1927 
and carried on with cars, having had 15 years with horses...’ 
The Australian Veterinary History Record also reveals 
that in 1923 the Northern Territory’s Chief Inspector of 
Stock requested a motor car to carry out his work which 
covered the entire territory. His request was denied, and 
he continued to carry out his duties with saddle and pack 
horse until 1927.

30
The formation of the Australian Veterinary Association had 
been proposed in 1914 but—as it turned out—a war got in 
the way.
The war years
The First World War ate up vets and horses like a hungry 
beast; 125 Australian vets served in the Australian Imperial 
Force, and 121 000 horses were sent to war. Sadly, only 
one of these horses returned to Australia. Many of the 
horses were used to transport equipment, artillery and 
supplies, but an unknown number were cavalry mounts. 
The first military contingent to leave Australia in 1914 
consisted of 20 000 men, 7500 horses and 19 Veterinary 
Officers. These horses and vets were at least fortunate in 
that valuable lessons had been learnt during the Boer War 
(1899-1902) about the effective organisation of military 
veterinary services.
The Australian Army Veterinary Corps (AAVC), formed 
in 1909, played a vital military role in keeping Australia’s 
forces mobile. Officers in the AAVC were responsible for 
directing, inspecting and reporting on the veterinary care 
of horses, and for training in shoeing, horse care and 
veterinary first aid. They also arranged the evacuation of 
sick and wounded animals, and ensured the provision of 
supplies for animal health (the rumour that AAVC officers 
were also responsible for reading sick horses a bedtime 
story is just that). The most common ailments vets treated
were mange, picked up nails and the effects of mustard 
gas.
The war also saw more Kendalls distinguish themselves. 
In 1917, Ernest Arthur Kendall, son of William Tyson 
Kendall, established the Australian Veterinary Hospital. This 
hospital—near Calais, France— treated 25 000 animals 
injured in the war. 
While the First World War inevitably caused much suffering 
to humans and animals alike, it did have a beneficial 
effect in creating a national consciousness and identity in 
Australia. Those who had previously viewed themselves 
as colony or British subjects now saw themselves as 
Australian citizens. As a result, the newly federated 
colonies were more prepared to work together to achieve 
national goals.
Max Henry referred to this in the first issue of the Australian 
Veterinary Journal in 1925 when he wrote: 
‘...in some ways, nothing could have done our profession 
more good. For the first time in our history men from 
all Australia were thrown together in such a way as to 
obliterate the names of the different States. The word 
‘Australia’ was carried on the shoulders of every man and 
it became a matter of far more importance that a man 
was ‘4th Division’ than that he was ‘N.S.W.’; the latter fact 
counted for nothing.’

31
The war was, however, slightly disastrous for the newly 
established university veterinary schools in Melbourne and 
Sydney. Since gender roles at the time said it was better 
for girls to bake something nice than enrol in veterinary 
science, the schools were largely dependent on male 
enrolments. But the war absorbed most young men, and 
during the war years enrolment in the Sydney vet school 
dropped to just four. 
However, even in 1919 there were still only 13 students 
enrolled in veterinary science and it’s thought that the 
advent of the automobile deterred enrolment, since many 
still believed that vets derived their primary income from 
treating horses. 
In the 1920s the vet school situation was worse in Victoria 
where—unlike in New South Wales—vet school graduates 
were not employed by the government. In 1928, only one 
student was taking classes at the University of Melbourne, 
and the school was forced to close by withdrawal of its 
government grant. The Veterinary Research Institute, 
however, remained open and was used by researchers 
to investigate a number of unappetisingly named animal 
diseases, including cheesy gland. (I may never eat cheese 
again!)
Max Henry. Photo courtesy of Dr Frank 
Doherty, Hon. Archivist, AVA.

32
The war on pleuro and bovine TB in 
the 1920s
While Victoria enacted legislation in 1905 to improve 
herd health and hygiene standards of the dairy industry, 
and a rigorous control program was implemented under 
Cameron, the war interrupted control efforts and pleuro 
became widespread again. This was despite its almost 
complete eradication by 1914 in Victoria.
Taking up the battle again after 
the First World War, a cattle 
compensation act was introduced 
in 1925, and by 1929 pleuro 
was eradicated from Victoria. 
However, severe outbreaks of 
pleuro continued to occur in 
northern Australia, particularly in 
Queensland, in the 1920s.
Max Henry, appointed Chief 
Inspector of Stock and Chief 
Veterinary Surgeon of the New South Wales Department 
of Agriculture in 1923, began his war on bovine disease 
in the 1920s by implementing the Tubercle-free Herd 
program in 1925. Part of the national dairy herd testing 
scheme introduced following the war, New South Wales 
herds supplying raw milk to large cities were tested for 
tuberculosis and, if declared free, retested again in  
12 months. 
Believing pleuro to be another important disease for 
eradication, Henry had firm ideas about achieving its 
demise. Several areas of New South Wales had been 
free of pleuro for more than 10 years by 1927, and Henry 
enforced a quarantine line to maintain this freedom. He 
also made testing and certification for livestock moving 
into these areas mandatory. The procedure of declaring 
protected areas free of pleuro was so successful that other 
states soon adopted it.
During his 24 year reign of the 
department’s veterinary services, 
Henry also furthered the cause of the 
government vet by insisting that all stock 
inspectors were vet school graduates. He 
was also responsible for the creation of 
districts controlled by district veterinary 
officers, who supervised the disease 
control activities of stock inspectors. 
Under Henry, government vets sprouted 
like daisies all over New South Wales.
The establishment of the Glenfield Veterinary Research 
Station in 1923 was a further boon to New South Wales. 
1890, until Glenfield was built, laboratory samples had to 
be sent to either the Bureau of Microbiology or Sydney 
University. Herbert Seddon— who fully shared Henry’s 
beliefs about the importance of disease control and 
prevention—was made Glenfield’s director, and Seddon 
I
n 1936 Herbert Seddon was 
appointed chair of the newly 
established Faculty of Veterinary 
Science at the University of 
Queensland. However, with nearly 
all students and many staff enlisted 
in the war, teaching ceased at the 
end of 1942 and wasn’t resumed 
until 1949.

33
and Henry’s partnership ensured a good marriage of field 
and laboratory services. 
Besides overseeing department laboratory testing, Seddon 
also led the facility’s research in the areas of cattle infertility, 
bovine brucellosis, pleuro and sheep diseases.
The steppe-murrain
In the 1700s, in the trail of mounted armies, a murrain 
swept from the Russian steppes into West Europe. It 
killed over 200 million European cattle in the eighteenth 
century, and then spread from Egypt to South Africa, where 
it succeeded in killing 90 per cent of the country’s cattle 
before its eradication in 1904.
Little wonder, then, that when steppe-murrain (rinderpest) 
appeared in Western Australia in 1923, there was much 
consternation—both government and public. When the 
disease was diagnosed by government vets and the 
minister informed, he immediately cabled the Prime 
Minister and requested a government vet familiar with 
rinderpest be sent to assist. 
Dr WAN Robertson, Chief Veterinary Officer of Victoria, 
travelled to Western Australia and confirmed the diagnosis 
of rinderpest. He was then promptly appointed control 
of the eradication program. His quarantine of infected 
farms and slaughtering-out was effective, as was 
surveillance of animals in the buffer zone. Also effective 
was the employment of some 200 men to patrol infected 
boundaries day and night to prevent animal movement 
from infected areas.
It’s thought that the disease may have originally entered 
via Fremantle Port, where ships departed for Asia with live 
ruminants, and sometimes returned carrying sheep skins, 
live animals (kept for ship provisions) and animal waste.
As a result of the outbreak, quarantine procedures were 
tightened. For example, manure from returned ships was 
no longer allowed to be collected and used on market 
gardens. Also, the return of sheep skins from Singapore 
was banned, and garbage and offal on ships was dumped 
at sea instead of being fed to local pigs.
The outbreak, which spread among 28 herds and in the 
areas of Beaconsfield, Belmont, Bassendean and Rottnest 
Island, was controlled within 64 days. However, almost 
3000 livestock were destroyed in the effort, which angered 
many locals. In a meeting between Robertson and angry 
dairy farmers, The West Australian quotes Robertson as 
saying: 
FACT: In 1922 the Commonwealth Department of 
Health assumed responsibility for the Quarantine Act 
1908. However, until WAN Robertson was appointed 
Director of the Division of Veterinary Hygiene in 1926, 
the department had no veterinary staff!

34
‘You think it is a pleasure for me to destroy your cows. I 
am following the dictates of science. To exterminate the 
disease a line of healthy cattle should be killed around 
the infected area. There was not the slightest doubt in 
my mind that it was rinderpest and the order was made 
for destruction…If the disease gets beyond control it will 
not be a few in Fremantle wanting milk but the whole of 
Australia wanting meat and milk. Millions will be ruined 
instead of hundreds being inconvenienced.’
Following the events in Western Australia, the Department 
of Health Director of Quarantine concluded in 1924 that the 
occurrence of rinderpest in Australia: ‘serve(d) to indicate 
the need for a reliable system of veterinary hygiene within 
the Commonwealth, as it is clear that no quarantine, 
however well-designed, can be relied on to prevent 
infallibly the introduction of epizootic disease.’
Subsequently, in 1926, the Division of Veterinary Hygiene 
was established within the Department of Health. The 
rinderpest outbreak in Western Australia had undoubtedly 
contributed to the creation of this division—and the 
appointment of Robertson as the first Australian 
Government veterinary officer. However, other influences 
were also present. 
The 1925 Australian Royal Commission on Health 
formally recognised that vets played an important part in 
safeguarding public health. It also made recommendations 
seeking better coordination between the Commonwealth 
Department of Health and the states on matters such as 
food and drug standards, and management of infectious 
diseases such as tuberculosis. It further recommended 
that an expert in veterinary science be made head of the 
Veterinary Quarantine Division to advise state officers. 
(This confirmed what Australian vets already suspected: 
everyone wanted vets running the country.)
Bubberman said…
The release of the Bubberman report was another spur to 
improve government vet services in the 1920s. The Director 
of the State Veterinary Laboratory in Java, Dr Bubberman, 
visited Australia in 1923 to report on the suitability of 
Australian dairy cattle and beef for feeding the Dutch 
military forces in Java (now known as Indonesia). Rather 
unkindly, he described the Western Australian veterinary 
service as ‘primitive’ and commented:
‘It is to be hoped that the Rinderpest which broke out in 
November, 1923, in the State in question will have opened 
the eyes of the authorities and will bring about an extremely 
necessary reorganization of it.’

35
The veterinary staff there was indeed enlarged, and a 
veterinary pathologist, HW Bennetts, appointed.
Bubberman also strongly criticised the appointment of 
laymen (rather than vets) to manage the Commonwealth 
Serum Laboratories, the Experimental Station at 
Yerongapilly and the Dairy Branch of the Public Health 
Department in New South Wales. As a final blow, he 
recommended that dairy cattle from South Australia, 
Western Australia and Queensland be excluded from export 
to Java.
In response to this report and the rinderpest events, at 
the Conference of Chief Quarantine Officers held in 1925, 
quarantine regulations were comprehensively revised. 
The next comprehensive revision of quarantine law was 
not until 1933, by which time scientific advances and 
increased air transport necessitated many changes. With 
the 1933 revision, a requirement for all livestock import 
certifications to be issued by vets was created, and even 
more government vets sprouted around Australia.
Australia and the OIE
T
he Office International des Epizooties (OIE) based 
in Paris was formed to combat rinderpest and other 
contagious diseases of animals. Today the OIE is also 
known as the World Organisation for Animal Health.
An agreement to form the OIE was signed in 1924 by 
28 countries, and Australia acceded in February 1925. 
Thus, Australia has been an OIE member country since 
1925. The Office of the Chief Veterinary Officer (within 
DAFF) coordinates Australia’s OIE work which includes 
regular disease reporting, commenting on draft OIE 
standards and participating in specialist commissions, 
ad hoc groups and working groups. 
A joint FAO/OIE announcement of global rinderpest 
eradication is expected this year. The official 
announcement will mark the first time in history that 
efforts have succeeded in wiping out an animal disease 
in the wild, and only the second time that a disease has 
been completely eliminated thanks to human efforts.

36
Dr Clunies Ross. Mitchell Library, State Library of NSW; hood_30331

37
The 1920s: the ‘golden era’ of 
veterinary research in Australia
Until the 1920s, vets in Australia either undertook research 
under their own steam, or with the assistance of industry, 
universities or state governments. To the outrage of many, 
national government planning, organisation or funding of 
livestock research was conspicuously absent. This was 
despite the livestock industries contributing to over 60 per 
cent of the national agricultural output—roughly an average 
of £140 million a year.
The need for livestock research was also quite urgent in the 
1920s. British health authorities had banned the import of 
Australian beef due to worm nodules (some people are so 
fussy) and then stopped lamb and mutton imports because 
of cheesy gland infection. Various diseases were also 
costing the livestock industries large sums in production 
losses and control measures.
In addition, Australian vets would have noted with envy 
animal health research activities abroad. In 1924, the World 
Organisation for Animal Health was established to deal with 
contagious diseases of animals, and considerable research 
was being undertaken in the United States by the Bureau of 
Animal Industry.
In the 1920s, Australia was still somewhat tied to the 
mother country’s apron strings, both economically and 
psychologically. Thus, when Britain pushed Australia to 
Section 5 
The golden era of 
veterinary research in the 
Twenties and Thirties

38
use science to increase agricultural productivity, and 
offered some funding, the cause was warmly embraced. 
As part of Britain’s research push, Sir Frank Heath visited 
Australia in 1925 to advise on the direction and structure of 
government involvement in science. His subsequent report 
saw the creation of the Council for Scientific and Industrial 
Research (CSIR) in 1926. 
While in 1925 all states had their own veterinary laboratories 
which undertook diagnostic and research work, this 
research was largely isolated. Thus, there was little 
understanding of how to cooperatively organise research 
efforts to gain maximum benefits for producers. Heath urged 
more collaborative investigation of livestock problems and 
How this was to be achieved, however, was not clear. 
Strong leadership was needed and, to this end, in 1928 
CSIR executives invited Sir Arnold Theiler to Australia to 
investigate Australian animal health problems. Behind their 
invitation was the secret hope that he might be persuaded 
to lead an animal health division of the CSIR, and gain the 
popular support of pastoralists and their purses.
Theiler was the internationally renowned ‘father of 
veterinary science’ in South Africa, and had successfully 
established and directed the famous Onderstepoort 
Veterinary Research Institute in Pretoria. However, he 
rejected the offer to become Chief of the CSIR Animal 
Health Division, and the job went to Jock Gilruth instead. 
In 1928 the CSIR also invited Arthur William Turner to 
work for the new Division of Animal Health, based on his 
impressive livestock research track record. In 1925 Turner 
had identified the agent causing black disease in sheep 
(infectious necrotic hepatitis), assisted by earlier work 
by vets which implicated liver flukes in allowing bacterial 
invasion of the liver.
Proving that timing really is everything, Turner’s research 
work influenced the CSIR executive’s formation of the 
Division of Animal Health. His research breakthrough came 
just as the idea for the new division was brewing, and his 
work demonstrated the considerable benefits to be had 
from a disease model of animal health that focused on 
pathology. This was in contrast to the prevailing animal 
husbandry approach which treated breeding and nutrition 
as more important than disease prevention and control. 
The research of Turner, then, was instrumental in ensuring 
the place of disease research and veterinary scientists 
within the new Division of Animal Health. Once again, 
government vets had staked out an important bit of territory 
for themselves.
J
ohn (Jock) Anderson Gilruth became acting Chief of 
the Animal Health Division of the CSIR at age 58 and 
was alarmingly direct. In response to one sheep breeder’s 
questions about the inability of his flock to thrive, Gilruth 
retorted, “Why don’t you feed your bloody sheep?”

39
Veterinary researchers attack 
livestock problems
During the 1920s the CSIR researched a range 
of livestock problems. Sheep ked and lice were 
investigated, and Itch Mite—a new parasite of sheep—
was identified. In the same decade, Harold Bennetts in 
Western Australia identified Beverley disease in sheep 
as a clostridial disease. Researchers around the country 
also investigated arthritis in lambs, scabby mouth, 
cheesy gland, ringworm, liver fluke, helminth parasites, 
hydatid disease and other diseases of sheep. The 
control of liver fluke in sheep, which had been causing 
losses of over £1 million a year, was an important 
outcome of 1920s CSIR research.
Due to this wide-ranging research on the diseases 
of sheep (cattle diseases were somewhat neglected 
until the 1930s) the ‘golden era’ of veterinary research 
further eroded the notion of vets as ‘horse doctors’. 
Also, notably, the relatively few vets who generated an 
enormous amount of livestock research were mostly 
graduates of the first vet schools established  
in Australia. 
Thus, the University of Melbourne vet school could claim as 
graduates AW Turner, Herbert Seddon, Lionel Batley Bull, 
Harold William Bennetts, John Legge and Ralph Bodkin 
Kelley. 
Over at the University of Sydney vet school, graduates 
included the influential figures of Lionel Rose, Ian Clunies 
Ross, Harold Roy Carne, Grahame Edgar and Reginald 
Gunn. 
Sydney Dodd: Veterinary researcher, 
professor, chief veterinary officer
A 
graduate of the Royal Veterinary College of London 
in 1902, Sydney Dodd was veterinary officer to the 
Tenth Hussars in South Africa, and witness to the host 
of epizootics that took hold following the Boer War. 
(Many Australian vets also saw service during the Boer 
war). Working with Theiler in South Africa for a while, 
he travelled to Australia in 1907 and promptly became 
one of the foremost bacteriologists in the country. He 
worked—in quick succession— for the Queensland 
Government, and then the newly established vet schools 
in Melbourne and Sydney. He specialised in protozoan 
diseases and his work on black disease in sheep paved 
the way for Turner’s research. Dodd was also known for 
being a bit of a softie, feeding tidbits to dogs staying at 
the University of Sydney Veterinary Clinic as patients.

40
Australia’s ‘golden era’ of veterinary research, then, owed 
much to the establishment and teaching of the earliest 
university veterinary schools. Professors and lecturers at 
these institutions would have been justifiably proud of their 
veterinary hatchlings, some of who later became lecturers 
and professors themselves. 
Lionel Bull, Chief of the CSIR/O Division 
of Animal Health and Nutrition,  
1935-1954. ©CSIRO
Farmers immunising a young sheep against 
enterotoxaemia, or ‘pulpy kidney’ disease. Archives 
Office of Tasmania. ADRI: AB713-1-3183

41
Journal \ jûrn  l \ (noun): a serious, 
scholarly publication
The Australian Veterinary Journal, established by the 
Australian Veterinary Association in 1925, was an important 
vehicle for the Australian veterinary profession to publish 
and develop scientific knowledge. Where else could vets 
read about exciting local developments in cheesy gland 
research?
Vets unable to attend association meetings could also 
thrill to the journal’s accounts of association activities, 
research findings and distant colleagues’ experiences—
whether they were government, university or privately 
employed. Furthermore, the journal supplied information 
about disease manifestation and conditions specific to 
Australia—information which, according to editor, Max 
Henry, was hard to come by elsewhere. 
The journal was heavily dependent on the work and 
contributions of Australian Veterinary Association (AVA) 
members to keep it afloat, and—intermittently—editorial 
exhortations appear for greater efforts by members. Even in 
the very first journal issue, the President of the AVA calls on 
members’ contributions to make the journal a success.
We are fortunate in having secured the services of Mr. Max 
Henry as Editor of our Journal, but his task is onerous and, though 
his energy is boundless, I confidently appeal to every member of 
the profession not to “flog the willing horse,” but to add, each and 
every one, his own contribution, great or small, for welding into 
this link which will bind us together for advancement.
Fellow veterinarians, the Journal is yours to make our mar, 
and the decision is with you as to whether the profession is to 
be strong in unity or to continue as independent units without 
cohesion and without adequate influence.
Believing that the overwhelming desire is for improvement, 
for advancement, for united effort, the Council of Australian 
Veterinary Association has organized the Journal which is now 
launched, and on behalf of the Council I commend its care and 
encouragement to the earnest consideration of every member.
I wish the Journal every success.
W. A. N. Robertson, 
President.
e

42
The 1930s: Depression, Zebu cattle, 
the war on parasites and the arrival of 
the chook vet
Due to its heavy dependence on agricultural and industrial 
exports, Australia was hit extremely hard by the worldwide 
Great Depression in the 1930s. 
Despite the difficulties, veterinary research managed to 
progress. 
South Australian sheep farmers (and sheep) benefitted 
from identification of the causes of a wasting disease 
called ‘coast disease’. CSIR scientists discovered that the 
cause was cobalt and copper deficiency in pastures, and 
developed a commercially available cobalt pellet that could 
be inserted and left in the sheep’s rumen.
Bacterial research also saw a vaccine developed to prevent 
botulism in sheep. The disease was first observed by 
Bennetts in the 1920s to be caused by sheep in Western 
Australia supplementing their diet with rabbit carrion—(yum).
Vets: the wind beneath the wings of 
poultry research
Glenfield Research Station began work on protecting 
poultry from disease in the 1930s, and Carne and others 
gained significant understanding of poultry diseases  
such as Infectious Laryngotracheitis, pullorum and fowl 
coryza. Their work not only made for scintillating party 
conversation, it also laid the foundations for devising 
effective control measures to protect Australia’s growing 
poultry industries.
During this period, Webster also created attenuated strains 
of fowlpox virus for different poultry species. Demonstrating 
the benefits of poultry disease research, in 1937 Len Hart 
produced a rapid pen-side test for pullorum which greatly 
assisted with testing and control of the disease.
Move over sheep, it’s time for more 
cattle research
In 1932, the Empire Marketing Board and the Australian 
Government provided a grant to CSIR to establish an 
animal disease research station in Queensland for 
research on pleuro. Gilruth, then acting Chief of the Animal 
Health Division turned to Turner to lead the research team 
at Oonoonba, Townsville. 
Turner’s team researched pleuro, peg-leg disease and tick-
borne diseases in cattle. Again, Turner was involved in an 
important research breakthrough. A broth was created for 
growing and sustaining pleuro organisms which permitted 
vaccination using hypodermic syringes. This was a vast 
improvement on the primitive technique of using a stringy 
seton which was dipped into an infected animal’s chest, 
threaded through a needle and then into a healthy animal.

43
The new technology made the vaccine transportable and 
also allowed the safest strains with the best coverage to be 
developed artificially. 
Gilruth also turned his attention to the cattle tick problem 
in Australia’s north. During his time in the Northern 
Territory as an administrator, Gilruth had made extensive 
investigations of the tick problem. He was certain that the 
solution lay in the cross-breeding of British cattle breeds 
with tick-resistant breeds which were also more genetically 
suited to the northern environment. Gilruth tasked animal 
geneticist Ralph Kelley with sourcing and cross-breeding 
Zebu cattle, which are also known as Brahman cattle. In 
1933, 19 Zebu cattle were imported into Sydney and Kelley 
played a leading role in cross-breeding experiments which 
successfully produced tick-resistant breeds. These breeds 
later became the main type of cattle produced in the north.
The war on parasites, or ‘just say 
no’ to trematodes, nematodes and 
cestodes
In 1929, the CSIR had appealed to the livestock industries 
for capital to build an animal health laboratory. Sir Frederick 
McMaster, a grazier, responded with a donation of £20 000 
and the laboratory was named after him when built at 
Sydney University alongside the vet school. The McMaster 
Laboratory opened in 1931, and was headed by Ian 
Clunies Ross. Parasitologist, Roy Carne, also had his own 
specially equipped laboratory where he happily studied 
cheesy gland all day long as well as pregnancy toxaemia 
in ewes. 
Believing it’s what on the inside that counts, the McMaster 
Laboratory staff primarily focused on intestinal helminth 
parasites of sheep, and many advances were made 
by Clunies Ross and others in understanding the 
specific epidemiology and ecology of parasites causing 
gastroenteritis in sheep. 
Flystrike research takes off
Research on flystrike was of great economic importance—
in 1933 the disease was estimated to cause £4 million in 
losses annually. This was aside from the horrific suffering of 
sheep having their flesh eaten by fly larvae. 
Early on, Lionel Bull recognised the part played by 
Pseudomonas spp. and other skin organisms in 
preparing the site for flystrike. In separate flystrike 
research, Seddon—working with HG Belschner and CR 
Mulhearn—undertook ‘wrinkle sorting’ experiments which 
demonstrated breech wrinkle as a key predisposing factor 
for breech and tail strike. 
Seddon, Belschner and Mulhearn proposed breeding away 
from the Merino to reduce wrinkles. However, the advent of 
mulesing and more sophisticated insecticides pre-empted 
further research in this area. Recently, however,

44
insecticide resistance has seen renewed interest in genetic 
breeding for blowfly resistance as a ‘clean and green’ 
solution to flystrike, and an alternative to mulesing. 
Bull, on sheep
Bull successfully investigated a number of sheep diseases. 
One of his most important breakthroughs, made with 
Dickinson, was finding the cause of cheesy gland in sheep. 
They identified the presence of Corynebacterium in sheep 
yards and camps as the culprit. Previously it was thought 
that sheep contracted the disease when their shearing 
wounds came into contact with shearing boards. By 
locating the source of infection in sheep yards, prevention 
was possible by placing newly shorn sheep into rested 
paddocks, rather than infected yards or camps.
Tasmania leads the way in brucellosis 
and bovine tuberculosis eradication in 
the 1930s
By the 1940s Tasmania had virtually eradicated bovine 
tuberculosis in its herds. This success was due, in great 
part, to compulsory testing schemes and producer 
cooperation. While 40 per cent of dairy cows supplying 
Launceston with milk were shown to be infected in 1925, 
this was reduced to less than 1 per cent in 1935.
Inspired by Tasmania’s achievements, in the 1930s 
Victoria and New South Wales Department introduced 
similar testing schemes for accrediting herds shown to be 
tubercle-free. As a result of these schemes, tuberculosis 
prevalence in tested herds steadily reduced.
As well as being the first state to eradicate bovine 
tuberculosis, Tasmania was Australia’s leader in the attack 
on brucellosis. In the 1940s (before vaccination) brucellosis 
infections sometimes resulted in 100 per cent abortion 
in some dairy herds. In Tasmania a state scheme was 
introduced in 1934 for accreditation of brucellosis-free herds.

45
Sheep at the McMaster Animal Health Laboratory were equipped with faecal bags 
 for the collection of worm egg and larval samples. ©CSIRO

46
A histopathology preparation room at the McMaster Animal Health Laboratory. ©CSIRO

47
Section 6
More war
With a mechanised army in the Second World War, one 
might assume that vets were not essential to the war effort 
in the 1940s. Wrong! Military vets ensured food safety 
for armies through meat, slaughter and dairy inspection. 
In addition, not all of the Second World War took place 
in terrain suited to vehicles. For example, in Papua New 
Guinea’s vast stretches of inaccessible mountain jungle, 
horses and mules were just the thing for supplying artillery 
and rations to armies.
Also, after the bombing of Darwin in 1942, the Northern 
Territory was declared a military area and civilians 
evacuated to Alice Springs. This required military vets to 
take over all government veterinary services in evacuated 
areas. 
During the war, Australian vets on the home front also 
did their best to address production diseases and 
inefficiencies that threatened food supplies for allied 
troops, citizens and export markets.
Extra vets were also needed when the United States 
Army based its troops in Queensland. The United States 
Army required its troops to receive milk from tuberculin-
tested herds. Legislation was enacted to allow testing by 
contracted vets, and by 1962 some half million cows a year 
were being tested in Queensland.
The Second World War 
and the post-war era—
new challenges for 
government vets

48
Dangerous breakfast preferences
Approximately 5500 United States troops were billeted 
in Riverwood, a Sydney suburb near Bankstown. Having 
sworn an oath to fight the enemy—and not one to give 
up bacon and eggs for breakfast—troops were supplied 
with imported ham, bacon and pork when local production 
failed to meet demand, but the imported pork products 
carried with them classical swine fever virus. 
Contact with Australian pigs then occurred through 
contracted piggeries collecting the army base’s discarded 
food scraps (including pork) and failing to adequately boil 
them down before feeding them to pigs.
Max Henry had a Swine Fever Command set up before the 
laboratory results from dying pigs were even confirmed, 
and every government veterinary officer was alerted. Due 
to his rapid action and effective tracing, the outbreak was 
controlled within eight weeks.
However, the incident brought home to veterinary 
authorities that the war and technological change were 
making Australia more vulnerable to the introduction 
of animal disease. With great foresight, Lionel Bull had 
already argued the need for rapid and accurate exotic 
disease diagnosis in 1941. The immediate outcome was 
the creation of the FMD Diagnostic Committee which 
drafted an emergency management plan for the disease. 
Later, continued concern about the exotic disease threat 
would lead to the creation of a national high security 
emergency animal disease laboratory. 
Run, rabbit, run
While humans were busy making war between 1939 and 
1945, Australian rabbits had been busy breeding. Rabbits 
grew to such plague proportions in many regions of 
Australia that huge chilling plants had to be constructed 
to store the hundreds of thousands of rabbits trapped by 
bounty hunters each week.
While Bull and Mules had begun investigating the use 
of myxomatosis in the 1930s, their research ran into a 
roadblock when they were refused permission to conduct 
experiments in the wetter parts of Australia—where 
mosquitoes and other winged vectors could transfer the 
virus between adjacent warrens. 
Eventually permission was gained, and experiments began 
in 1950. After what seemed like initial failure, the virus 
began to spread rapidly, and millions of rabbits were killed 
in just a few months. While a gruesome sight, the efficacy 
of myxomatosis allowed recovery of Australia’s wool and 
meat production to the tune of $68 million.

49
The great Tasmanian vet shortage
I
n 1942, pressured by an acute shortage of vets, 
Tasmanian Chief Veterinary Officer, RCT 
Philp, introduced a nationalised veterinary 
service (NVS) in Tasmania. Unique in the 
English–speaking countries, the service 
encouraged government vets to undertake 
clinical works as well as their departmental 
work. Stockowners were provided with 
a heavily subsidised clinical service, as 
there was only a moderate flat fee for 
most visits.
Releasing the Myxoma Virus for rabbits. ©CSIRO

50
The Northern Territory blooms under 
Rose
With the war at an end, Colonel Alfred Rose arrived in 
the Northern Territory in 1946 to take up the post of Chief 
Veterinary Officer. Government veterinary services had long 
been neglected in the Northern Territory. However, straight-
shooter Rose was a gifted leader and quickly established 
the Animal Industry Branch (AIB) and greatly expanded 
its resources and functions. This included establishing 
veterinary research on wildlife, animal husbandry and 
poisonous plants.
Under Rose, AIB staff numbers grew almost as quickly as 
Australia’s rabbit population—going from 11 staff in 1947 
to 118 in 1965. He also rewrote animal industry legislation, 
encouraged farm herd vaccination for pleuro, renovated 
the facilities for travelling stock and produced droving 
programs for scheduled disease inspection. One of his 
most successful innovations was the creation of the Central 
Australia Protected Area, from which pleuro was eradicated 
by 1958, and which greatly reduced spread of the disease 
between the Northern Territory and South Australia.
Post-war developments
Following the war, lipstick factories could go back to 
making lipstick instead of munitions, soldiers rushed back 
to their families and sugar addicts rejoiced at the end of 
sugar rationing.
The growth of intensive livestock production systems also 
increased, and more government vets were needed to 
monitor the health of intensive systems, which were more 
vulnerable to infectious disease. 
The development of a national pleuro eradication program 
in the late 1950s also saw further demand for government 
vets, as did the post-war expansion of Australia’s export 
markets for livestock products (mostly beef). Importing 
countries demanded greater levels of veterinary inspection 
at Australian export abattoirs. 
The new trade opportunities also saw researchers 
focus on enabling Australia’s livestock industries to be 
globally competitive, by improving genetics, pastures and 
husbandry for optimal production.
Abattoirs and Freezing Works, Somerset, 
Government Inspector. Archives Office of Tasmania. 
ADRI: AB713-1-3542.

51
It’s all about freedom
Despite the need for increased productivity, disease 
freedom still remained an important goal for Australia. 
Australia’s new export markets were free from FMD, and 
required the same freedom from trade partners.
One recognised threat to Australia’s 
disease freedom was the thousands of 
post-war European immigrants doing 
their best to smuggle their favourite 
foods from FMD endemic regions into 
Australia. Similarly, increased air travel 
(following the advent of jet aircraft 
in the 1950s) and changing political 
geography in the region were viewed 
as possible threats to Australia’s 
quarantine barrier. 
These threats led veterinary authorities 
in Australia to examine closely their 
preparedness to effectively handle an exotic disease 
outbreak. What they saw filled them with discontent; Australia 
had little expertise in studying viral livestock diseases and 
was reliant on overseas expertise and laboratories for exotic 
disease diagnosis. In a nutshell, Australia’s animal disease 
preparedness was not up to snuff.
This was completely unacceptable as in the mid-1950s 
there were estimated to be some 150 million sheep on the 
continent, and sheep and cattle products were the bulk of 
the nation’s exports. The protection of livestock from exotic 
disease was essential. What was needed was a plan for a 
national veterinary virology laboratory.
Towards this plan, the CSIRO established a virology 
section in 1958. This was the first unit in Australia to be 
specifically devoted to research on 
virus diseases of animals. However, an 
exotic diseases committee—established 
in the early 1960s by the Australian 
Veterinary Association—identified that 
national resources in the 1960s were 
still insufficient to rapidly diagnose or 
control an exotic disease incursion. 
The committee recommended the 
development of a central laboratory, 
staffed with experts in exotic disease 
diagnosis. This recommendation was 
seconded by an independent CSIRO-
commissioned review.
However, for political reasons, the CSIRO Australian Animal 
Health Laboratory would not be officially opened until 
1985. In the meanwhile, the New South Wales Department 
of Agriculture established a virology laboratory in 1969 
which undertook important research on a number of viral 
infections affecting Australian livestock.
I
n 1949 the CSIR became 
the CSIRO and a vet, Ian 
Clunies Ross, was appointed 
to lead not just the Animal 
Health Division, but the entire 
research organisation. (Vets 
around the nation looked at 
each other speculatively and 
wondered if world domination 
by vets was imminent.)

52
Nobody likes a threat to their  
export markets
In the 1960s, while veterinary authorities were cogitating 
about exotic disease preparedness, and researchers 
were looking for ways to increase productivity, Australia’s 
livestock export markets were rudely threatened by new 
overseas import requirements.
In 1965 the West German Department of Health specified 
that from 1966 onwards, only brucellosis-free herds would 
be accepted for meat import. Then, also in 1960s, the 
United States stipulated that carcases with any tubercular 
lesions would be rejected, and that imports of casein and 
milk powder from countries with bovine tuberculosis or 
brucellosis would be restricted. 
As Australia’s major beef export market, the announced 
expected freedom from bovine tuberculosis in the US by 
1984 also caused consternation. 
Suddenly, the national eradication of bovine brucellosis 
and bovine tuberculosis gained new priority, and in the 
1970s the first national campaign to eradicate these 
diseases commenced. 
While most states and territories already had test-and-
slaughter programs for bovine tuberculosis and brucellosis 
(which also compensated producers for compulsory 
slaughter), the national eradication was still a huge  
undertaking. Before eradication was achieved, around  
27 million blood samples were tested at laboratories. 
The swinging Seventies
The Seventies weren’t all bell-bottom pants, sideburns 
and platform shoes. The Australian College of Veterinary 
Scientists was formally established in 1971, and continues 
today to assist vets in all fields of work to pursue 
postgraduate and proficiency qualifications. 
Australia was also declared free from pleuro in 1973 (an 
event way more important than the birth of lava lamps and 
disco). Pleuro had prevented the export of live cattle from 
Australia for over a century, and its eradication enabled 
new export opportunities—as well as sparing many cattle 
from a very painful disease. 
Unlike pleuro, bovine tuberculosis remained a problem. 
The greatest challenges to eradication occurred in the 
extensive grazing areas in central and northern Australia, 
but government vets and station owners soon came up 
with cunning solutions. Weaning and age segregation, 
heifer segregation and infrastructure investment strategies 
all accelerated eradication, as did research development of 
improved bovine tuberculosis testing methods.
In another major coup for government vets, the Bureau of 
Animal Health was created in 1974. It became Australia’s 
central coordinating body for veterinary matters, and 
permitted a national approach to disease epidemiology 
and control.

53
Headed by vet Bill Gee, and residing within the Australian 
and Forestry, the bureau was created with the aim of 
centralising the provision of animal health in Australia. 
Thus, it assumed coordination of the newly created 
national brucellosis and tuberculosis eradication programs. 
The bureau’s wordy official mandate was ‘the eradication 
and control of major endemic and exotic animal 
diseases by working closely with the Australian Veterinary 
Association, CSIRO and state and territory departments of 
agriculture’. 
Also in the Seventies, the CSIRO pulled off a research hat-
trick; the toxins causing lupinosis in sheep were isolated, 
a vaccine was developed for campylobacteriosis in cattle, 
and the bacterial toxins responsible for annual ryegrass 
toxicity were isolated and identified. They also reaffirmed 
their love of poultry by establishing an Avian Diseases 
Section within the CSIRO Animal Health Research 
Laboratory.
The Eighties say goodbye to bovine 
brucellosis
The Eighties were an exciting time for government vets—
well, even more exciting than usual. In 1984 the Australian 
Government Department of Health transferred animal and 
plant quarantine functions to the Department of Primary 
Forestry). Incorporating the Bureau of Animal Health, the 
new organisation was called the Australian Agricultural 
Health and Quarantine Service (AAHQS). Now that all the 
government vets were together in a single department, 
organising fondue parties was that much easier, not to 
mention coordinating veterinary matters.
Computer nerds make friends with veterinary 
epidemiologists
W
ith the intensification of livestock production, 
the need for disease monitoring and surveillance 
increased. The modern computer provided the means 
for managing this data, and for modelling production 
systems and disease. In the 1970s the first Australian 
university graduate program in veterinary epidemiology 
(using computer modelling) was developed, and vets 
could officially join the nerd-herd, so to speak. In the 
1970s, government vets also began to develop health 
programs for herds based on their epidemiological 
modelling work.

Protective laboratory suits at AAHL. ©CSIRO
54
Then, in 1985, the Australian Animal Health Laboratory 
(AAHL) was opened. AAHL was Australia’s first national 
high-biocontainment research facility and the first in 
the world to receive accreditation as an International 
Collaborative Centre for New and Emerging Diseases by 
the World Organisation for Animal Health. 
Since its establishment in 1985, AAHL has tested tens 
of thousands of samples, demonstrating Australia’s 
continuing freedom from a range of diseases, including 
FMD, bovine spongiform encephalopathy, scrapie and 
numerous diseases of pigs, poultry and fish. AAHL 
scientists have also made significant contributions in 
developing diagnostic tests for FMD that do not require 
live virus, and developing more specific and rapid tests for 
the diagnosis of diseases such as bluetongue, Newcastle 
disease and avian influenza. AAHL’s work greatly supports 
veterinary authorities in the diagnosis and control of 
suspected outbreaks 
of exotic disease, and 
government vets with 
a hankering for exotic 
disease expertise can 
undertake training at AAHL 
in disease recognition.
In another departmental 
shuffle, in 1986 the 
Australian Quarantine 
and Inspection Service 
(AQIS) was established, 
T
he Australian Animal 
Health Laboratory 
opened in 1985. The 
CSIRO’s AAHL is one of 
the most sophisticated 
laboratories in the world 
for the safe handling and 
containment of animal 
diseases.

55
and assumed responsibility for animal, pest and plant 
quarantine and border control (and the soulfully cute 
quarantine beagles). Along with the beagles, quite a few 
government vets were employed by AQIS, particularly in 
the area of meat inspection. Following a meat substitution 
scandal in 1981, when ‘beef’ briefly became a synonym 
for kangaroo meat, many government vets were involved 
in a decade-long reform process. They researched and 
implemented better technology, procedures and legislation 
for assuring meat and food quality. 
Then, in a glorious end to the decade, Australia was 
declared free from bovine brucellosis in 1989 (and 
government vets celebrated with a month of nightly 
fondue parties). Private vets had played a key role in the 
brucellosis eradication campaign by undertaking testing, 
vaccination, abortion investigations, and post-mortem 
exams. In North Queensland, they had also worked 
with departmental staff and owners to draw up property 
eradication plans. Established local vets also did much to 
open up communication between district vet officers and 
pastoralists averse to the government.
At the same time, bovine tuberculosis continued to remain 
resistant to eradication in the north, and new financial 
assistance and tax incentives were provided to assist stock 
owners with the eradication costs of destocking, testing 
and infrastructure improvements.
Flying vets and Judas cows
In the frenzy caused by Dolly the sheep being cloned from 
an adult somatic cell, some may have missed the historic 
events going on in the world of government vets in the 
1990s.
After many years of service and significant research work, 
the Glenfield Veterinary Research Station closed in 1990. 
However, new facilities also opened; the Parkville Veterinary 
Research Institute in 1991 and the Elizabeth Macarthur 
Agricultural Institute in 1990.
Another new development was the creation of an Australian 
Government statutory authority—the Australian Pesticides 
and Veterinary Medicines Authority (APVMA)—in 1993.
Since nobody likes too much Dieldrin, DDT or antibiotics 
in their food, states and territories have, for a long time, 
required chemical products to be evaluated before they 
can be legally supplied, sold or used for agricultural or 
veterinary purposes.
In a move to centralise the registration of all agricultural 
and veterinary chemical products in Australia, the APVMA 
replaced the old system whereby each state and territory 
had its own system of registering and prescribing the 
use of veterinary chemical products. Government vets 
at APVMA now provide a valuable service in reducing 
the potential risks to trade and consumers of chemical 
residues in food and fibre products.

56
Also big in the 1990s was Australia’s declared freedom 
from bovine tuberculosis in 1997. While eradication had 
been relatively quick in the south, the remote northern 
regions—with their extensive herds, lack of fencing, 
rugged terrain and feral buffalo acting as reservoirs—
proved much trickier. Still, vets came up with equally 
cunning solutions to achieve a complete muster. Radio 
collars on ‘Judas cows’—who seek out feral cattle and 
buffalo—were used to track down ‘unmusterable’ cattle 
and buffalo which had craftily developed nocturnal grazing 
habits to avoid detection. 
Government vets even took to the skies—using light aircraft 
to cover the enormous distances involved in eradication 
work in the Northern Territory and North Queensland. 
Innovative partnerships—Animal 
Health Australia
In another positive move, governments and major national 
livestock industry organisations in Australia united in 
1996 to form the Australian Animal Health Council Ltd, a 
not-for-profit public company. The council commenced 
operating under the more user-friendly business name of 
Animal Health Australia in February 2000. Animal Health 
Australia manages approximately 50 national programs 
on behalf of its 31 members; these programs improve 
animal and human health, biosecurity, market access, 
livestock welfare, productivity, and food safety and quality. 
The organisation is unique—most countries do not have 
a similar organisation providing joint government and 
industry funding and planning for national animal health.
Not only is Animal Health Australia unique, it is also the 
custodian of the Emergency Animal Disease Response 
Agreement (EADRA)—a contractual arrangement between 
governments and industry to collectively and significantly 
increase Australia’s capacity to prepare for, and respond 
to, emergency animal disease incursions. The EADRA is a 
world-first initiative; a legally binding agreement between 
state and territory governments, and 14 livestock industry 
signatories. The EADRA, which was ratified in 2002, 
facilitates rapid responses to emergency animal disease 
incidents. 
The EADRA is underpinned by AUSVETPLAN, 
the Australian Veterinary Emergency Plan. 
Authority for the development and maintenance of 
AUSVETPLAN also rests with Animal Health Australia. 
Drafted by experts (mostly vets) from Australian national, 
state and territory governments and the livestock industries, 
AUSVETPLAN manuals document the national contingency 
planning framework for the management of animal disease 
emergencies in Australia. With its comprehensive range of 
up-to-date, disease-specific response manuals, Australia 
is a global leader in animal disease response planning and 
preparedness. In a nutshell, AUSVETPLAN sets the world 
standard for disease planning. Government vets can be 
proud of the role they play in contributing to this standard 
of disease planning and preparedness.

57
From scab to fab: comparing the 
veterinary situation in the nineteenth 
and twenty-first centuries
Looking back over two centuries, in the 1800s there was 
only one private veterinary college offering a degree in 
veterinary science. Today there is at least one university 
vet school in each mainland state. Furthermore, in the 
1880s Australia had no animal disease laboratories. 
However, by the 1930s most states had research facilities 
and diagnostic laboratories, and in 2011 all states and 
territories have these—in addition to access to Australia’s 
national laboratory.
Likewise, full-time government vet numbers in Australia 
have expanded from just one in 1883 to several hundred 
in 2011. Also, from a total absence of government vets 
in policy-making positions up to and during the 1880s, in 
the early 1900s most states had vets in charge of disease 
control and quarantine matters. In the 1920s, government 
vets also attained Commonwealth government positions. 
Today, each state and territory has its own government 
veterinary service, working with that of the Australian 
Government.
Veterinary research also grew from the self-resourced 
experiments of individual vets such as Graham Mitchell in 
the 1860s, to state and territory research in the early 1900s, 
and then national research programs in the 1920s and 
onwards.
Section 7
Government vets today 
and in the future

58
Government vets have also played an important role in 
Australia’s trade and economy. As a country, we export 
more than half of all our livestock products, and overseas 
market entry is largely gained due to the control, inspection 
and approval of exports by government vets. In addition, 
access to foreign markets, also facilitated by government 
vets, has allowed livestock industries to expand beyond 
supplying the Australian domestic market, and to achieve 
significantly higher returns. 
Finally, in the early 1800s Australia had an enviable level 
of livestock disease freedom, except for the ever-present 
scab. However, by the 1890s a number of serious diseases 
were hurting animal health, public health, productivity and 
trade markets. This situation was reversed in the twentieth 
century, as government vets employed legislation, disease 
management programs and research to eradicate and 
prevent many diseases—reclaiming Australia’s enviable 
level of disease freedom. The past few decades have also 
seen significant changes in Australia’s ability to detect and 
manage disease outbreaks and potential threats.
The cost of disease and the value of 
disease freedom
The following is a selection of just some of the many 
diseases eradicated from or prevented from entering 
Australia through the efforts of government vets and others. 
Equine influenza (EI): In August 2007, equine influenza 
was diagnosed in Australia. The subsequent response to 
eradicate infection within the states of New South Wales 
and Queensland involved 10 000 properties over an area 
of approximately 280 000 square kilometres, and the 
vaccination of more than 140 000 horses. The direct cost of 
the response was over $100 million. The last known clinical 
case was on 25 December 2007, and Australia’s freedom 
from EI declared on 30 June 2008. Australia was again 
recognised as EI-free by the OIE in December 2008.
Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy (BSE): A number of 
countries in Europe and Asia, as well as the United States 
and United Kingdom have reported cases of BSE. In 
most countries, incidence of the disease put a big hurt on 
beef exports—the European Union banned the import of 
beef from the United Kingdom for ten years. In the United 
Kingdom epizootic of BSE during the 1990s, more than 
179 000 cattle were infected and 4.4 million slaughtered 
during the eradication program. Australia is free from BSE 
because entry has been prevented through import bans 
on meat and bone meal since the 1960s. In addition, 
testing through the National Transmissible Spongiform 
Encephalopathies Surveillance Program (NTSESP) 
demonstrates Australia’s ongoing freedom from BSE, and 
will provide early detection should the disease occur.
Peste des petite ruminants (PPR): PPR is a viral disease 
(similar to rinderpest) of goats and sheep which is

59
characterised by fever, necrotic inflammation of the mouth 
lining, and enteritis. It is endemic in West Africa and is 
described as the most destructive viral disease against 
small ruminant flocks. A major constraint to intensive small 
ruminant farming in affected areas, mortality in susceptible 
flocks varies from 10 per cent to 100 per cent and 
morbidity from 50 per cent to 100 per cent. The disease 
has never occurred in Australia and that’s how we’d like to 
keep it.
Highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI): While 
the H5N1 strain of HPAI has never been reported in 
Australia, there have been five outbreaks of other HPAI 
strains in commercial bird flocks, all of which were 
successfully eradicated. The last reported case was in 
1997 in Tamworth, NSW. Previous outbreaks occurred 
in commercial poultry farms in Victoria (1976, 1985 and 
1992) and Queensland (1994). A stamping-out policy 
based on slaughter, disinfection and movement controls 
was applied, and all outbreaks were eradicated before 
any significant spread occurred. While not confirmed, 
poultry contact with wild birds carrying HPAI was thought 
to be the cause of the outbreaks. To provide some idea 
of what an outbreak of H5N1 might cost Australia, the 
Netherlands spent more than 150 million to eradicate the 
disease in 2003. Government vets in Australia have worked 
with policy makers, industry and others to make sure that 
comprehensive biosecurity, quarantine and response 
measures are in place to protect against the disease.
Emerging Infectious Diseases—a 
special challenge 
As vets know, diseases are tricky, cunning things. They get 
bored with where they live and pop up in new geographic 
areas. Or, in a microbial make-over, they change their 
virulence and other characteristics. In extreme cases, 
microorganisms suffer a mid-life crisis and decide to extend 
their host range and incidence, or develop multi-drug 
resistance. For all these reasons, vets like to keep a close 
eye on what are called emerging infectious diseases (EIDs).
Graham Mitchell’s nineteenth century research on the 
emergence of anthrax in Australia is probably the earliest 
EID research by a government vet in Australia. More 
recent research by government vets includes that on 
Menangle virus, Hendra virus and Nipah. In fact, Australia’s 
investment in EID expertise and detection capability 
has seen a number of its government vets selected to 
participate in international expert groups which steer 
global research and response policies against EIDs. As 
Australia’s Nobel Prize winner, Peter Doherty—also once 
a government vet—likes to say, ‘don’t underestimate the 
‘science’ in ‘veterinary science’.

60
How do government vets in Australia 
make a difference today?
Today government vets...
»	 prevent, eradicate and manage animal diseases in 
Australia and abroad
»	 respond to emergency animal disease outbreaks and 
participate in simulation exercises
»	 participate in global and regional disease control 
programs and projects
»	 help improve public veterinary services in developing 
countries 
»	 monitor wildlife for exotic animal disease
»	 support Australia’s trade, industries and economy 
through export certification, import risk assessments, 
and by fulfilling international disease surveillance and 
reporting requirements 
»	 train Australian Veterinary Reservists to respond to 
emergency disease outbreak/incursions
»	 monitor and provide assurance of animal welfare
»	 undertake applied research and development projects
»	 monitor locally produced and imported food
»	 protect public health against zoonotic diseases and the 
misuse of veterinary drugs
»	 assist the livestock industries with animal productivity, 
health, biosecurity and surveillance
»	 monitor and plan for exotic animal disease incursions
»	 develop scientifically based animal health and welfare 
policy and advice
»	 develop international trade rules
»	 negotiate market access for Australian agricultural, 
pharmaceutical and service industries.

61
Looking for a government 
veterinarian?
You may find them in some unusual places... 
and doing unexpected things!
…inspecting salmon farms in Norway...
…negotiating trade and market issues in  
	 overseas Australian embassies... 
…on a plane accompanying incoming horses...
…supervising PhD students...
…surveying animal health in East Timor...
…assisting with avian influenza prevention in Indonesia...
…assisting epidemiological studies of human disease  
	 at the Department of Health and Aging...
…tracking feral pigs in Far North Queensland...
…at international trade negotiations in Geneva...
…sampling wild birds in the Northern Territory...
…training livestock officers in Papua New Guinea...
…discussing international animal health standards  
	 at the OIE in Paris. 
An alphabet of veterinary challenges 
and opportunities
A 
is for AQUATIC HEALTH: There is a growing need 
for aquatic veterinary services driven by the strong 
global growth in aquaculture, and the emergence of 
many transboundary diseases in aquatic animals.
C 
is for CLIMATE CHANGE: Vets are already looking 
at possible future animal health scenarios caused 
by climate change. For example, arthropod-borne 
viral diseases are likely to continue to spread as climate 
change extends the range of disease vectors. In this case, 
veterinarians will have an important role collaborating 
with, or working within, public health and environmental 
agencies. Monitoring the global animal health environment 
for signals preceding emergent threats to animal (and 
human) health is, and will remain, a significant future 
challenge and opportunity for vets. 
E 
is for ECOHEALTH: EcoHealth is a new approach 
to understanding and promoting health bringing 
together vets, physicians, ecologists, economists, 
social scientists, planners and others to comprehensively 
study and understand how ecosystem changes are 
implicated in newly emerging infectious diseases such as 
Nipah virus and Hantavirus.

62
F 
is for FOOD INSECURITY: The Food and Agriculture 
Organization estimate there were 923 million 
undernourished people in 2007. Since food insecurity 
has been steadily increasing over the past few decades, 
the number of undernourished people can be expected 
to grow. Improving livestock health and productivity is one 
way of increasing food security—and an opportunity for 
vets to help combat world hunger. 
G 
is for GLOBALISATION: Globalisation has increased 
the potential for rapid disease and pest spread, 
and unsafe food reaching numerous consumers 
in distant markets. With the increased mobility of these 
threats, it’s important that vets step up their efforts in 
building regional disease control capacity and contribute 
to global or transboundary approaches to animal disease 
control.
I 
is for INFORMATION: The ability to collect and rapidly 
disseminate national data on animal diseases is 
becoming more and more essential for countries to 
access national, regional and international markets. Vets 
will continue to play a key role in developing essential 
animal health surveillance and reporting systems.
L 
is for LIVELIHOODS: Animal disease outbreaks and 
response/mitigation measures have a significant 
economic impact on livelihoods. These impacts are 
multi-dimensional and not always well understood. A future 
challenge for vets and others will be integrating research 
on livestock value chains into effective disease response 
strategies.
O 
is for ONE HEALTH: Collaboration between public 
health experts, veterinarians and ecologists will 
be essential for combating emerging infectious 
diseases. Why? Because these diseases require 
management approaches combining public health, 
veterinary and ecological expertise, surveillance and 
response. Since emerging infectious diseases are on the 
increase, the need for collaborative approaches will also 
increase. 
P 
is for PREVENTION: Prevention really is better than 
cure, if the cost of disease outbreaks is compared 
with that of preventive measures. And, as animal and 
human health agencies move away from reactive response 
and towards proactive prevention, more emphasis is being 
placed on early reaction mechanisms and resources such 
as animal disease intelligence and networks. Vets have 
a key role to play in developing the required networks 
and mechanisms for early disease warning and response 
measures.

63
S 
is for SUSTAINABILITY: Vets need to promote and 
participate in animal health policy, programs and 
research that support sustainable natural resource 
management. This includes addressing the world’s 
dwindling biodiversity. 
T 
is for TRADE: Animal health trade issues aren’t 
getting any simpler. Veterinary involvement will 
increasingly be required in the negotiation of 
international agreements, standards, guidelines and 
recommendations, as world animal health and trade 
environments grow more complex.
W 
is for WELFARE: The trend in animal welfare 
in Australia is one of increased citizen and 
consumer awareness and expectation. Vets will 
continue to play a role in developing welfare standards that 
meet these expectations while also remaining scientifically 
based.
Z 
is for ZOONOSIS: Many human infectious diseases 
and most emerging infectious diseases are zoonotic. 
Highly pathogenic H5N1 avian influenza outbreaks 
and the H1N1 pandemic illustrate the considerable impact 
of such outbreaks. The zoonotic disease threat may 
intensify as populations continue to become more mobile, 
densely housed and closely associated with animals. 
Poor livestock health management, lack of vaccination, 
more intensive livestock production and increased animal 
product processing may also provide increased pathways 
for zoonoses. Combating zoonoses may become one of 
the most important challenges for vets in the future.

64
References 
Adams, JN 1995, Pelagonius and Latin veterinary 
terminology in the Roman Empire, Brill, New York.
Burns, WE 2003, Witch hunts in Europe and America: An 
encyclopedia, Greenwood Publishing Group, Westport, CT.
Butcher, B 2000, Of vets, viruses and vaccines, CSIRO 
Publishing, Victoria.
Dunlop, RH & Williams, DJ 1996, Veterinary Medicine: An 
Illustrated History, Mosby, St. Louis.
Fenner, F (ed.) 1990, History of Microbiology in Australia, 
Australian Society for Microbiology, Melbourne.
Hadani, A & Shimshony, A 1994, ‘Traditional Veterinary 
Medicine in the Near East: Jews, Arab Bedouins and 
Fellahs’, Revue scientifique et technique, vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 
581-97.
Jayne, WA 1962, Healing gods of ancient civilizations, 
University Books Inc, New York.
Lehane, R 1996, Beating the odds in a big country, CSIRO 
Publishing, Victoria.
Parsonson, I 1998, The Australian Ark, CSIRO Publishing, 
Victoria.
Schedvin, CB 1987, Shaping science and industry, Allen & 
Unwin, Sydney.
Schwabe, CW 1978, Cattle, Priests, and Progress in 
Medicine, University of Minnesota Press, Minnesota.
Thrusfield, M 2007, Veterinary Epidemiology, Blackwell, 
Oxford.
Todd, J 1995, Colonial technology: science and the transfer 
of innovation to Australia, Cambridge University Press, 
Melbourne.
press), ‘Chapter 6: Animal Health and Production Issues’, 
Australia.
The Australian Veterinary History Record was an 
invaluable source of historical information— all 58 issues! 
Issues are available at: http://ses.library.usyd.edu.au/
handle/2123/222.
Numerous issues of the Australian Veterinary Journal, 
particularly those from between 1925 and 1960, also 
provided much valuable historic information.