World Organisation for Animal Health (WOAH)

The World Organisation for Animal Health (WOAH) is an inter-governmental organisation formed in

1924. It currently has 183 member countries.

Its objectives are to:

ensure transparency in the global animal disease situation

collect, analyse and disseminate veterinary scientific information

provide expertise and encourage international solidarity in the control of animal diseases

safeguard world trade by publishing health standards for international trade in animals and

animal products, within its mandate under the World Trade Organization Agreement on the

Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures

improve the legal framework and resources of national Veterinary Services

provide a better guarantee of the safety of food of animal origin and to promote animal welfare

through a science-based approach.

Australia’s Objectives

Australia is a strong contributor to WOAH processes to protect our animal health status and substantial

trade in animals and animal products.

Australia contributes to the WOAH standards to ensure that standards are science-based and achieve

their purpose without imposing an unjustified burden on Australian producers.

The Australian Chief Veterinary Officer is Australia’s Delegate to the WOAH. The Office of the Chief

Veterinary Officer (OCVO) coordinates Australia’s WOAH work and draws on the expertise of other

under consideration.

Enquiries may be directed to the WOAH Australia contact point by emailing WOAH Australia.

WOAH National Focal Points

A WOAH National Focal Point is an individual nominated by the WOAH Delegate of member countries.

The roles and responsibilities of Focal Points are under the authority of the ACVO as the WOAH

Delegate for Australia. While Focal Points serve primarily as a means for improved communication

between Members and the WOAH, their functions also include establishing networks and improved

communications at the country level between two or more Competent Authorities.

Currently, the WOAH has eight Focal Points in the following specialist areas: Animal Disease

Notification, Wildlife, Veterinary Products, Veterinary Laboratories, Animal Production Food Safety,

Aquatic Animals, Animal Welfare and Communication. To find out more about the terms of reference of

individual focal points, go to the WOAH website.

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

•

Please email WOAH Australia to get in touch with a focal point for one of these specialist areas.

Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/animal/health/woah