The Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry manages 5 tariff rate quotas put in place by the
Australia-India Economic Cooperation and Trade Agreement (AI-ECTA), including an annual quota for
almonds of 34,000 tonnes.
Access to the quota is on a first-come, first-served (FCFS) basis until the available quota amount has
been exhausted.
Exporters can use the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade tariff portal to find the current tariff rate
applying to their product and to compare the tariff reduction received under the AI-ECTA agreement.
Key dates to remember
1 January - Quota year commences
31 December - Quota year finishes
Current Quota usage
The quota usage tables show the total quantity of quota used by Australia for AI-ECTA products. The
tables are updated regularly.
Check out the current quota usage for India almonds.
Apply for an AI-ECTA quota certificate for almonds
Exporters will need to apply to export almonds to India at the reduced tariff rate.
To apply for a quota certificate an exporter must:
lodge a request for permit (RFP) through the department’s electronic documentation system,
EXDOC
complete and submit the AI-ECTA almonds TRQ certificate application using the online submit
button on the last page of the form.
Download form
Once we have approved the application, we will email the quota certificate to the email address
provided on the completed TRQ certificate application. AI-ECTA quota certificates cannot be amended
so if there is a change to the exporter, importer, product type or quantity of the shipment after the
certificate has been issued the existing certificate may need to be cancelled and a replacement certificate
issued. Contact Quota Admin if there is a change to any details on the certificate.
Note: Quota administration is cost recovered on a per certificate basis in accordance with the Export
Charges (Imposition-General) Regulation 2021 and the Export Control (Fees and Payments) Rules
2021. Exporters are invoiced monthly for any quota certificates issued. The current cost recovered
amount is $86 per certificate issued.
• 
• 
• 
•

Read the detail
Legislation
The Export Control (Tariff Rate Quotas-General) Rules 2021 governs the rules around quotas for
almonds to India.
Data collection
We report on export quotas using data submitted for certificate applications.
Contact us
Phone: 02 6272 4068
Email: quota.admin@aff.gov.au
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/export/from-australia/quota/india-quotas/india-almond-quota