The Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry manages 10 quotas under the Australia-United
Kingdom Free Trade Agreement (A-UK FTA), including wheat and meslin.
Australian exporters can export up to 80,000 tonnes of wheat and meslin at a 0% tariff rate. Access to
the quotas is on a quarterly first-come, first-served (FCFS) basis until the available quota amount has
been exhausted.
Note: the volume access amounts for year 1 of the agreement are pro-rata amounts. Wheat and meslin
pro-rata amount is 47,123.288T for year one and then 80,000T for the following years of the
agreement.
Exporters can use the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade tariff portal to find the current tariff
rate applying to their product and to compare the tariff reduction received under the A-UK FTA.
Key dates to remember
1 January - Quota year commences, and first quarter of quota opens
1 April – second quarter of quota opens
1 July – third quarter of quota opens
1 October – fourth quarter of quota opens
31 December – Quota year finishes
Current Quota usage
The quota usage tables show the total quantity of quota used by Australia for A-UK FTA products. The
tables are updated regularly.
Apply for a quota certificate for wheat and meslin
Exporters will need to apply to export wheat and meslin to the UK at the reduced tariff rate.
To apply for a quota certificate an exporter must:
lodge a request for permit (RFP) through the department’s electronic documentation system,
EXDOC; and
complete and submit the A-UK FTA TRQ certificate application using the online submit button
on the last page of the form.
A-UK FTA quota certificates cannot be amended without the corresponding export documentation
being amended so if there is a change to the exporter, importer, product type or quantity of the
shipment after the certificate has been issued the existing certificate may need to be cancelled and a
replacement certificate issued. Contact Quota Admin if there is a change to any details on the certificate.
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
•

Note: Quota administration is cost recovered on a per certificate basis in accordance with the Export
Charges (Imposition-General) Regulation 2021 and the Export Control (Fees and Payments) Rules
2021. Exporters are invoiced monthly for any quota certificates issued. The current cost recovered
amount is $86 per certificate issued.
Issuing a quota certificate
Under the legislation the department is required to provide a paper-based certificate with an original
government stamp and signature for all UK certificates. To comply with this process the department
will issue a paper-based certificate and post to the exporter using the standard Australia Post method.
The department will provide the exporter with an electronic copy of the certificate and then post the
original to the exporter as this will be required by UK Customs.
The department can send certificates to exporters using Express Post through Australia Post if the
exporter provides the department with self-addressed envelopes. If an urgent certificate is required to
be sent directly overseas this can be done if the exporter provides the department with courier satchels
and account details.
If a certificate is required urgently, email the Quota unit with the RFP/REX number of the consignment
that requires a manual certificate. The email must be received by the Quota Unit no later than 10.00am
(Canberra time) for same-day processing.
Read the detail
Legislation
The Export Control (Tariff Rate Quotas—General) Rules 2021 governs the rules around quotas for
wheat and meslin to the UK.
Data collection
We report on export quotas using data submitted for certificate applications.
Contact us
Phone: 02 6272 4068
Email: quota.admin@aff.gov.au
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/export/from-australia/quota/uk-eu-quotas/uk-wheat-meslin-quota