The Indonesia-Australia Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement (IA-CEPA) entered into
force on 5 July 2020. The agreement put in place reduced tariffs for exports of vegetables.
Quotas under the IA-CEPA cover:
carrots
potatoes
Key dates
The quota year runs in line with the calendar year.
1 January—New quota year commences
31 August—Deadline for reclaim and apply for reallocation
18 November—Deadline for annual quota allocation application
31 December—Quota year ends
Current quota usage
The quota usage tables show the amount of quota available, and the total quantity of quota shipped by
Australia for IA-CEPA products. The tables are updated regularly.
How to apply for an entitlement
Exporters will need to apply for a quota allocation to export carrots or potatoes to Indonesia at the
reduced tariff rate.
Starting from the 2023 quota year, allocations will be based on an exporter’s previous history of
shipping carrots or potatoes to Indonesia. Exporters eligible to receive an allocation, based on these
criteria, will be invited to apply for an allocation of carrot and/or potato quota. The application closing
date is 18 November in the calendar year immediately before the quota year. Submissions after this date
will not be accepted. If no allocations are made, all quota will be available on a first-come, first-served
basis.
An exporter can apply for an entitlement allocation by:
completing the Tariff rate quota allocation application below, under "download"
submitting the completed PDF form using the online submit button on the last page of the form.
Quota entitlements will be calculated and the Quota Unit will notify exporters of their quota allocation
for the quota year. Any quota not allocated in this process will be available on a first come first served
basis.
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
•

New Entrant Access
All TRQs must provide a pathway for new entrants to enter and establish themselves in a market. As IA-
CEPA carrot and potato quota is allocated based on an exporter’s previous shipping history, this
impedes the ability for new entrants to access this market. A separate pathway is therefore included to
provide new entrants access to the benefits of tariff rate quota.
From the 2023 quota year an amount of 400 tonnes of carrot quota and 600 tonnes of potato quota will
be set aside for use by new entrants. This quota can be accessed by any exporter that has not received an
allocation of that quota in the previous three years. Individual new entrants are capped at accessing up
to 250 tonnes of carrot quota and 300 tonnes of potato quota. Exporters are considered new entrants
for a period of 3 years to enable them to develop the shipping history necessary to receive a standard
allocation. The new entrant amount is accessible on a first come first served basis from the start of the
quota year until reclamation day, 31 August.
How to apply for an IA-CEPA quota certificate
To apply for a quota certificate an exporter must:
lodge a request for permit (RFP) through the department’s electronic documentation system,
EXDOC.
complete and submit the IA-CEPA horticulture TRQ certificate application (below, under
"download") using the online submit button on the last page of the form.
Once the application is approved, the quota certificate will be sent to the email address provided on the
TRQ certificate application form.
Note: Quota administration is cost recovered on a per certificate basis in accordance with the Export
Charges (Imposition-General) Regulation 2021 and the Export Control (Fees and Payments) Rules
2021. Exporters are invoiced monthly for any quota certificates issued. The current cost recovered
amount is $86 per certificate issued.
Changing or cancelling a certificate
Contact Quota Admin if a quota certificate needs to be:
changed (a new application form will need to be submitted if there is a change to the exporter,
importer, product type or quantity of product)
cancelled.
How to transfer or return quota
Vegetable entitlements can be:
transferred
• 
• 
• 
• 
•

returned at any point in the quota year.
You can transfer or return your entitlement by:
completing either the IA-CEPA vegetable TRQ entitlement transfer application or IA-CEPA
vegetable TRQ entitlement voluntary return application below, under "download"
submitting the completed PDF form using the online submit button on the last page of the form.
Download
IA-CEPA vegetable TRQ entitlement transfer application form (PDF 242 KB) IA-CEPA vegetable TRQ
entitlement voluntary return application form (PDF 237 KB)
If you have difficulty accessing this form, contact the Quota Admin for assistance.
Reclaiming and reallocating quotas
Each August, the Quota Unit will contact exporters holding IA-CEPA vegetable quota entitlement to see
if they will use their remaining entitlement or if they wish to return it or request additional
entitlements. Penalties apply for retaining quota that is not used by the end of the quota year. Exporters
should be familiar with penalty provisions which can be found in the Rules.
After 1 September, remaining quota (apart from any extra allocation requested by exporters) will be
available on a first come first served basis. The amount of available first come first served quota is
shown in the ‘Unallocated’ column of the IA-CEPA quota position table.
Read the detail
See Appendix 2-A.1: Tariff rate quotas of the IA-CEPA for:
a list of eligible products
the quantity for each year
the in-quota tariff rate.
Read about the IA-CEPA’s broader outcomes.
Legislation
The Export Control (Tariff Rate Quotas-General) Rules 2021 governs the rules around quotas for
vegetables.
Data collection
The Quota Unit reports on export quotas using data submitted for quota entitlements and certificate
applications.
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
•

Contact us
Phone: 02 6272 4068
Email: quota.admin@aff.gov.au
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/export/from-australia/quota/indonesia-quotas/vegetables