The Assistant Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, Senator the Hon Anthony Chisholm, has
announced the successful applicants for the AgConnections – Skilled Agricultural Work Liaison pilot
program. They are:
Charles Sturt University
Charles Darwin University
University of Queensland
Australian National University
The agricultural industry is critical to the economic success of the nation. It provides incredible
opportunities to contribute to the government’s sustainability and climate agenda and provides
thousands of jobs in rural and regional Australia.
To continue to grow and prosper, the agricultural industry must attract more talented, qualified
workers to consider a career in the industry. This involves a whole-of-government approach to invest in
the skills of Australians, create more job opportunities in regional areas, support secure pathways for
overseas workers, and ensure workers are protected.
Agricultural workforce data and research is published by ABARES.
Find out how the Australian Government is supporting the agricultural industry to better skill, attract,
protect, and retain its workforce in the following factsheet.
Download
Supporting the agriculture sector and its workforce factsheet (PDF 276 KB) Supporting the agriculture
sector and its workforce factsheet (DOCX 235 KB)
If you have difficulty accessing these files, visit web accessibility for assistance.
Work we do
We work collaboratively with unions and industry to ensure the needs of the agricultural workforce are
understood and considered across government.
The Agricultural Workforce Forum continues its work in finding solutions that address workforce issues
in the agriculture and processing sectors. The Forum brings together employer groups, unions and the
Australian Government to work collaboratively and identify opportunities to support careers in
agriculture.
The Forum met for the first time on 20 November 2023 and meets quarterly.
Find out more about the Forum, including a full list of members.
• 
• 
• 
•

AgConnections – Skilled Agricultural Work Liaison pilot program
The AgConnections – Skilled Agricultural Work Liaison pilot program aims to encourage university
students to consider a career path in agriculture. The pilot program provides $1 million in funding for
universities to develop and run an agricultural work liaison pilot program over 2025 -2026.
The four universities successful through the grant round to deliver the pilot are:
Charles Sturt University
University of Queensland
Australian National University
Charles Darwin University.
AgCAREERSTART
The AgCAREERSTART pilot program is a structured employment program to help young Australians
start a career in agriculture in their gap year. Read more about AgCAREERSTART or register your
interest at agcareerstart.com.au.
Community Perceptions and Worker Experiences Program
The Community Perceptions and Worker Experiences Research program aims to better understand and
respond to community perceptions and worker experiences within the agriculture, fisheries, and
forestry sector. There are multiple projects delivered under the program:
AgriFutures Australia has released a range of new resources to help teachers and career advisers
encourage young people to consider a career in Australia’s agriculture industry, under the Career
Advisers Project. The resources make up the second part of the Cultivating the Next Generation project,
delivered by AgriFutures Australia and Central Queensland University, with funding from the
Australian Government. The final research reports and several case studies promoting positive aspects
of working in the sector are available on the AgriFutures website.
AgriFutures is currently undertaking two new projects under the Community Perceptions and Worker
Experiences program:
The First Nations Engagement project will help to better understand First Nations community
engagement preferences with Australia’s rural industries workforce. The project will analyse several
case studies that highlight First Nations-owned businesses in Australia that are actively facilitating First
Nations engagement in the agricultural workforce.
The Growth Industry project will help to understand and capture positive worker experiences in careers
in agriculture from which AgriFutures will develop case studies and promotional material to ensure
they effectively communicate agricultural career opportunities with the broader community.
• 
• 
• 
•

National Careers Institute Career Mapping Project
The National Careers Institute built an interactive career map on the YourCareer website, showcasing
the breadth and diversity of occupations in the agriculture, fisheries and forestry sector.
AgUP
The AgUP grants program supports industry-led projects that are creating opportunities for attraction,
retention, upskilling, training, mentoring and career progression for the agricultural workforce.
Projects run to 2024-25:
Seafood Industry Australia Limited has partnered with the Fisheries Research and Development
Corporation to deliver a digital national seafood industry platform that acts as a one-stop shop for
workers in all sectors of the seafood industry. For more information visit the Seafood Careers
website at seafoodcareers.com.au
Rural Business Tasmania Incorporated is partnering with the Tasmanian Institute of Agriculture
to deliver a training and development program focused on knowledge, leadership, business
management and extension skills.
Fair Farms
The Fair Farms initiative is an industry-led training and certification scheme that provides training in
and monitoring of fair employment practices to reduce the risk of worker exploitation in the Australian
horticultural industry. More information can be found on the Fair Farms website.
An inclusive and diverse workforce is important to the growth of Australia’s agricultural sector.
Employers and employees can find out more about what Commonwealth support is available by
accessing our Workforce diversity and inclusion in agriculture factsheet.
The factsheet specifically outlines what Commonwealth support is available for:
People with disability
Women
First Nations Australians.
Engagement across government
We also work closely with other Commonwealth agencies to represent the agricultural workforce and
ensure they are considered in relevant policies.
The Pacific Australia Labour Mobility (PALM) scheme remains a key program for meeting agricultural
workforce shortages and allows eligible Australian businesses to hire unskilled, low-skilled and semi-
skilled workers from 9 Pacific Islands and Timor-Leste when there are not enough local workers
available. The government is working closely with the Pacific and the sector to strengthen and expand
the scheme.
• 
• 
• 
• 
•

For more information visit the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade PALM website.
The government is continuing the implementation of the Migration Strategy. Information on the
Strategy can be found at the Department of Home Affairs website.
Fee-Free TAFE is providing opportunities for Australians to access skills and training across priority
industries. Almost 22,114 students have enrolled in an agriculture-related Fee-Free TAFE course as at
30 September 2024. Places are now available for enrolment for students looking to commence a career
in the industry or existing workers wanting to upskill.
Find out more about these opportunities at YourCareer.
Download
Fee-free TAFE for agriculture fact sheet (PDF 624 KB) Fee-free TAFE for agriculture fact sheet (DOCX
231 KB)
If you have difficulty accessing these files, visit web accessibility for assistance.
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/farm-food-drought/agricultural-workforce