Client feedback
Feedback is a valuable element in understanding our clients’ views of their experience with the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry. Whether you are pleased with our performance or we have not met your expectations, we highly value your comments.
Feedback can be suggestions, compliments or complaints.
- Suggestions are ideas on how we could improve our services or do our business differently.
- Compliments are praise or congratulations about any aspect of our services, performance or the way we do our business.
- Complaints express dissatisfaction or unmet expectations about any aspect of our services, performance or the way we do our business.
Combined with structured industry consultation, your feedback helps us to continually improve our service delivery.
We are committed to providing our services in ways that consider the impact on you, while meeting our legal and community obligations.
Our feedback process aligns with the department's Client Service Charter.
Procurement complaints
To provide feedback on a procurement process, please refer to the department's Procurement Feedback Guidelines.
How to contact us
Online
Complete the Suggestions, compliments and complaints form.
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry
Client Feedback
Reply Paid 858
Canberra ACT 2601
Phone
+61 2 6272 3084
In person
Contact us directly at your nearest Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry office.
Need help to make a comment?
If you require an interpreter you can contact us through the Translating and Interpreting Service (TIS) on 131 450.
If you are d/Deaf, hard of hearing, or have a speech/communication difficulty please contact us by:
Step 1
Contact us through your preferred NRS call channel detailed on NRS call numbers and links.
Step 2
Provide the NRS with our phone number: 1800 900 090.
For more information visit: About the National Relay Service
How will the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry protect my privacy?
Your privacy will be protected under the Commonwealth Privacy Act 1988.
The information you provide on this form is used to improve and maintain our services and/or investigate and respond to your feedback. The information will be disclosed to the business area to which the feedback relates. It will not be used or disclosed to third parties unless you provide your consent, or we are required or authorised by law to do so.
Your personal information will be stored in accordance with the Information Privacy Principles. You are not required to provide your name or contact details, however, if you would like a reply, please specify how you would like the department to contact you. If you wish to correct or amend any information, please request this in writing to the address listed.
How will my feedback be treated?
If you telephone, we aim to respond to your contact within two working days.
If you write, email or lodge an online form we aim to acknowledge you within two working days of receipt.
If you have requested a response to your feedback we aim to respond within 10 working days of the date you provide the complete details of the matter you would like us to look into. If the matter is complex, it may take longer in which case an interim response will be provided.
If you are not satisfied with the outcome you receive, you may request an internal review of the decision or contact the Commonwealth Ombudsman on 1300 362 072.
Suspected legislative breaches
If you have witnessed or have information on a suspected breach of portfolio legislation, including Australian biosecurity regulations or laws call the Redline number on 1800 803 006.
Fraud and corruption
If you have witnessed or have information of any suspected incidents of fraud or corruption against the department please contact the Fraud and Security Team.
Other border agencies
If you wish to provide feedback about other agencies that work with the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry at the border, you can contact:
Australian Department of Home Affairs
If your feedback relates to the Department of Home Affairs, go Compliments, complaints and suggestions.
Australian Federal Police
If your feedback relates to the conduct or actions of individual Australian Federal Police (AFP) appointees; practices and procedures of the AFP go to AFP Feedback and Complaints.