Do you have farmers as clients or members of your organisation? These resources have been developed for you to share so they know what support is available now.
If you’re a farmer, check what drought and rural support we provide .
Support before, during and after drought
Prepare for drought
You can use this content on preparing for drought in your newsletter and social media.
Use our images on your social media channels.
Manage through drought
You can use this content on managing through drought in your newsletter and social media.
Use our images on your social media channels.
Navigating Drought - Australian Government Policy and Support Measures
This video outlines the Australian Government’s approach to drought policy and the different support programs available.
7 November 2025
Video duration: 3mins 37 secs
Introduction
This is the transcript of a video produced by the Department of Agriculture Fisheries & Forestry. The video addresses common questions and information about Australian Government drought policy and support measures.
[Recording begins]
Mel Brown [00 :07- 00:43]
The Australian Government is committed to supporting farmers and regional communities to prepare for, manage through and recover from drought. Drought can have wide reaching impacts, not just on farms, but on families and communities and with climate change, droughts are expected to become more frequent, widespread and severe in some regions. That's why we, the Australian government, take a long term, structured approach to drought, supporting Australians at every stage of the drought cycle. This cycle guides the development of our drought policies and programs, ensuring the right support is available when and where it's needed.
Courtney Bryant [0:44 – 01:42]
Let's take a closer look at our drought policy framework. It begins with the National Drought Agreement or NDA, a partnership between the Commonwealth and all state and territory governments. This agreement allows for a consistent, collaborative approach to drought policy across the country. It clearly defines the roles of the Australian government and the roles of state and territory governments who lead on the ground drought response in their jurisdictions, including managing animal welfare and natural resource issues. Sitting under the NDA is the Australian Government Drought Plan. This outlines how we will deliver on our NDA commitments. The plan includes details about how we will monitor and respond as conditions change, as well as the programs we offer. The Australian government no longer makes drought declarations. Instead, we offer a range of programs and support that are always available, so farmers and communities don't have to wait for a declaration to get help. They can access support they need when they decide they need it. Our message is simple know your options and apply early.
Mel Brown [01:43-02:29]
The programs we offer aim to help farmers prepare for drought and become more self-reliant, but also provide support in the tough times as even the most prepared can face difficult times and decisions. Opportunities provided by the Future Drought Fund, such as the Farm Business Resilience Program and through the Drought Resilience, Adoption and Innovation Hubs, help farmers plan, adapt and build resilience to the effects of drought and climate change. The Farm Management Deposit Scheme helps farmers build financial buffers in high income years to draw on in tough ones. And for those facing hardship, the Farm Household Allowance provides payments, personal loans, case management support and training.
Courtney Bryant [02:30-03:00]
The Rural Financial Counselling Service is a free, independent service that can provide support tailored to your farm business. And RIC loans, which are concessional loans, can help farmers in need prepare for, manage through and recover from drought. We also support mental health and small business wellbeing through primary health networks, Medicare mental health centres and the Small Business Debt Helpline.
Mel Brown [03:03-03:16]
Drought is a shared responsibility. We work closely with state and territory governments in the farm and finance sectors, charities and community organisations to help farmers and regional communities prepare for and manage drought.
Courtney Bryant [03:17]
If you want to stay engaged and up to date, please join our National Drought Network, which is open to anyone. The Australian Government is here to support farmers and regional communities to prepare for, manage through and recover from drought. Support is available now. Visit drought.gov.au to learn more and access resources.
Recording ends [3:37]
End screen displays the website drought.gov.au for more information. Also says the project is funded by the Australian
Government and the DAFF logo is also displayed.
Acknowledgement of Country
We acknowledge the Traditional Custodians of Australia and their continuing connection to land and sea, waters, environment and community. We pay our respects to the Traditional Custodians of the lands we live and work on, their culture, and their Elders past and present.
© Commonwealth of Australia 2023
Unless otherwise noted, copyright (and any other intellectual property rights) in this publication is owned by the Commonwealth of Australia (referred to as the Commonwealth).
All material in this publication is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Licence except content supplied by third parties, logos and the Commonwealth Coat of Arms.
The Australian Government acting through the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry has exercised due care and skill in preparing and compiling the information and data in this publication. Notwithstanding, the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, its employees and advisers disclaim all liability, including liability for negligence and for any loss, damage, injury, expense or cost incurred by any person as a result of accessing, using or relying on any of the information or data in this publication to the maximum extent permitted by law.
Understanding Australian Government drought declarations
The Australian Government no longer makes drought declarations. You do not need one to access help for financial problems. This applies to government programs and help from your bank.
The Australian Government now gives support based on need and personal circumstances. There are options to help you prepare for, manage through, and recover from drought.
This change is based on more than 40 years of experience. Lessons come from past droughts, reviews, and farmers' feedback. Our programs aim to help with planning, managing risk, and staying financially independent.
A range of resources about drought declarations are available:
You can also visit the Australian Banking Association Financial Assistance Hub to see how lenders can help.
Future Drought Fund resources
Farm Business Resilience Program
This program is supported by the Australian Government’s Future Drought Fund. It’s delivered by all state and territory governments.
Explore cases studies of farmers who have benefitted from the program.
My Climate View
Explore this free climate tool. Supported by our Future Drought Fund. Developed by the Bureau of Meteorology and CSIRO.
Watch the video about My Climate View.
Financial support
RIC concessional loans
Explore RIC’s stakeholder resources. These include loan products flyers, webinars and case studies.
Farm Household Allowance
Farm Household Allowance (FHA) assists commercial scale farmers and their partners in financial hardship.
For guidance see our Farm Household Allowance factsheets.
Tax measures
Find out more on Farm management deposits and other tax measures.
Rural Financial Counselling Service (RFCS)
The RFCS provides free and independent financial counselling. It’s available to eligible farmers, fishers, foresters and small related businesses.
Watch this video case study to see how rural financial counselling can help.
Social support
We fund local governments and community organisations to provide support.
Find out how to access free social support services.
See advice on how to support others during hard times.
Stay up to date
Subscribe to farm support and Future Drought Fund news.