Overview
Agricultural traceability is a shared responsibility between industry, governments and the broader
agricultural supply-chain participants. The Australian Government has committed over $131 million to
enhancing agricultural traceability. Activities will support action to meet the objectives of the National
Agricultural Traceability Strategy 2023 to 2033 (the strategy).
Project Lead: Department of Agriculture Fisheries and Forestry
Project Contact: agtracecoord@aff.gov.au
Project Status: Active
Objective alignment:
7 – Improve the integrity of animal health systems.
Activity alignment:
7.2 – Implement mechanisms to streamline or automate animal and animal product traceability
data across agreed industries and make this accessible to all supply chain participants.
7.3 – Use traceability systems to provide feedback to supply chain participants on animal health
outcomes.
Project updates
February 2026
The Traceability Grants Program (TGP) – Round 4 was published on 12 January 2026 and closed for
applications on 18 February 2026. The grant round will fund projects that meet the program objectives
and focus on the priority areas for action of the strategy:
Priority area for action 2: Align processes and technologies to capture and use data for multiple
purposes, such as regulators and feedback to farmers.
Priority area for action 5: Support industry to implement interoperable systems.
Priority area for action 8: Implement a communication and education campaign to strengthen
awareness of agricultural traceability.
Information on this grant opportunity can be found at GrantConnect and the department’s Traceability
Grants Program page.
August 2025
All projects under the TGP – Round 3 were underway and had submitted their second progress reports,
as required in their grant agreements.
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
•

The National Agriculture TGP project Brand Australia International Traceability Symposiums
concluded in April 2025 following the acceptance of its final report.
Five symposia were hosted in 6 locations as part of this project. Each symposium highlighted Australia’s
commitment to enhancing agricultural traceability. The events gathered a total of 280 participants at
venues in Sydney, Jakarta, Riyadh, Brussels, Antwerp and Los Angeles.
These events advanced Australia’s agricultural traceability agenda, building trust in Australian food and
fibre products. It also increased recognition of Australia’s traceability enhancement efforts and how it
supports market access.
The grant also promoted Australia’s practices and innovation to meet food safety and sustainability
standards amongst key trading partners.
November 2024
The Australian Government is investing in grants and initiatives to support traceability arrangements,
evidence-based credentials, and better use of data and technology. This includes:
improving reporting and livestock traceability
exhibiting Australia’s practice and innovation
building trust in Southeast Asian markets
delivering symposiums
supporting value-added benefits to First Nations people.
May 2024
The TGP – Round 3 were published on 5 February 2024.
TGP is part of the Modernising Agricultural Trade – Protecting Australia’s Clean, Green Brand initiative
and supports collaborative agricultural traceability projects. These projects help implement activities
under the strategy.
See more
To see key activities under this project:
Tags: Active, Objective 7
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/animal/health/animal-plan/project-34
• 
• 
• 
• 
•