Overview
Australia has world-leading livestock traceability systems and an ongoing reform agenda ensuring these systems not only continue to meet but surpass future needs. This is key to preserving our biosecurity and enhancing export trade.
In 2022, Australia’s Commonwealth and state and territory agriculture ministers committed to work collaboratively with industry on a national approach to Australia’s livestock traceability systems. This included the agreement to introduce a national mandatory eID system for sheep and goats.
Project Lead: The Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry
Project Contact: animalplan@aff.gov.au
Project Status: Active
Project date: 2022 to 2027
Objective alignment:
- 7 – Improve the integrity of animal health systems.
Activity alignment:
- 7.2 – Implement mechanisms to streamline or automate animal and animal product traceability data across agreed industries and make this accessible to all supply chain participants.
Project updates
August 2025
Key implementation milestones and activities currently underway are outlined in the Sheep and goat eID National Implementation Plan.
May 2025
Ongoing implementation efforts across government and industry are on track.
The Sheep and Goat Traceability Task Force (SGTTF) continues to meet regularly to inform national implementation efforts leading up to full national implementation from 1 January 2027.
February 2025
Sheep and goat eID commenced nationally from 1 January 2025. Under a Commonwealth grant, a series of webinars and podcasts to support eID implementation have been successfully delivered by Sheep Producers Australia and the Goat Industry Council of Australia.
The SGTTF continues to meet regularly to inform national implementation efforts leading up to full national implementation from 1 January 2027.
May 2024
To support ongoing implementation efforts across government and industry, the SGTTF has developed:
- Sheep and goat eID National Implementation Plan
- National Principles – implementation of individual eID for sheep and goats.
November 2023
Government and industry are working together to implement national mandatory individual electronic identification (eID) for sheep and goats, working towards 1 January 2025. This will improve the accuracy and efficiency of our already robust systems.
The updated National Implementation Plan was released on 27 September 2023.
See more
Tags: Active, Objective 7