Overview
Considering the biosecurity threats to Australia’s borders, crisis management plans are an important tool for livestock industries. However, it is unclear how many of these plans exist across livestock sectors, or if they would provide sufficient guidance to a sector in an EAD crisis.
This project aims to review existing resources and form a collaborative approach between government and industry across a wide range of species. This will help to develop new templates and resources that holistically address the actions and events that may take place in an EAD crisis. These resources will be available to industry and government for ongoing training and exercise support via a purpose-built portal.
Project Lead: Animal Health Australia
Project Contact: aha@animalhealthaustralia.com.au
Project Status: Active
Objective alignment:
- 1 – Improve Australia’s preparedness and ability to respond to EADs.
Activity alignment:
- 1.1 – Continue to implement recommendations from emergency responses including EAD incursions, COVID-19, previous EAD simulation exercises and recent natural disasters.
- 1.3 – Operationalise AUSVETPLAN manuals and documents across industry supply chains and structures.
Project updates
Future Actions
The project will end on 30 June 2026. Industry bodies are discussing how they may continue to collaborate with each other on their crisis management plans (CMP) in future.
May 2026
All CMP templates and basic guidance videos have been completed and are stored in a dedicated Microsoft Teams channel accessible to all peak industry bodies. A final workshop to support industry bodies in implementing and exercising their CMPs was held in May 2026.
February 2026
The CMP guidance materials were in the final stages of review. The project committee agreed to hold an additional workshop in the first half of 2026 to support industry testing and upskilling.
November 2025
The CMP documentation was updated based on feedback from the August workshop. The CMP Steering Committee met in October 2025 to discuss the report from the workshop and recommendations for the final phase of the project.
August 2025
An in-person workshop to test CMP documentation was held on 8 August 2025. It involved national industry peak bodies, the Department of Primary Industries and Regions South Australia, and the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry. Feedback from this session will help refine and finalise the documents.
May 2025
A review of crisis management documents and gap analysis of industry requirements has been completed.
A draft CMP template and related documents have been developed for industry use. These will be tested by peak industry bodies in a workshop. It will be planned and held during the second phase of this project.
November 2023
The developed resources will be made available to other industries. Some industries have already developed their own plans and are sharing them as part of the initial project review.