Overview
The South Australian (SA) Red Meat and Wool Blueprint 2030 (the Blueprint) establishes a vision for a progressive and sustainable South Australian red meat and wool value chain that is connected and adaptable. It aims to empower industry to capture market opportunities while continually improving the wellbeing, productivity and profitability of livestock, people and land.
The Blueprint is structured around five pillars:
- our livestock
- our environment
- our market access
- our people
- our industry.
It sets out 16 priority areas and 37 targets to be achieved by 2030. It is supported across the entire value chain, with Livestock SA charged by industry to drive coordination, delivery and ongoing relevance.
Project Lead: Travis Tobin
Project Contact: admin@livestocksa.com.au
Project Status: Active
Objective alignment:
- 6 - Implement industry sustainability frameworks and plans.
Activity alignment:
- 6.1 - Share knowledge (such as the development of benchmarks) between industries to implement industry sustainability frameworks and plans.
Project updates
Future Actions
Future actions include reviewing Blueprint targets, assessing progress against those targets, aligning South Australian Sheep and Cattle Industry Fund investments with the Blueprint in future funding rounds, and progressing development of the Blueprint beyond 2030.
November 2025
An external consultant undertook an independent assessment of the value delivered by South Australian Sheep and Cattle Industry Fund investments from 2021 to 2025. A determination was made on how well these investments aligned with the priorities of the Blueprint.
August 2025
Commenced oversight and review of the Blueprint.
August 2024
6 strategic plans previously managed and supported by Livestock SA were amalgamated into the Blueprint. These included the SA Sheep, Beef and Biosecurity Blueprints; Sheep and Cattle Industry Fund Management Plans; and Livestock SA Strategic Plan. The Blueprint was launched at LambEx in July 2024.