Overview

Spatial modelling will be used to better understand feral pig distributions and their ecology, enabling

cost-effective strategies for feral pig management.

The data generated from this project will inform strategic decision-making within biosecurity incident

responses affecting feral and domestic pig populations.

Project Lead: Queensland Department of Primary Industries

Project Contact: Robyn.Grob@dpi.qld.gov.au

Project Status: Complete

Objective alignment:

1 – Improve Australia’s preparedness and ability to respond to emergency animal diseases.

Activity alignment:

1.4 – Undertake projects, including commissioning and research, to further develop economic

analyses and epidemiological modelling tools supporting rapid decision-making in emergency

animal disease responses for priority diseases.

Project updates

August 2025

A manuscript, Variable response to aerial culling demonstrates adaptability of feral pigs has been

published in the international journal Applied Animal Behaviour Science.

May 2025

The study on the behavioural (movement) response of feral pigs to aerial control was presented at the

Australasian Vertebrate Pest Conference in Sydney, New South Wales on 1 August 2024.

Watch the presentation by Dr Catherine Kelly on Variable responses to aerial control.

February 2025

A fourth scientific paper was published in Wildlife Research on 16 April 2024.

November 2023

Biosecurity Queensland’s feral pig spatial modelling has improved understanding of feral pig

distributions and their ecology. This will enable cost-effective strategies for feral pig management.

• 

•

Three scientific papers were published in Wildlife Research, Australian Mammalogy and the Australian

Veterinary Journal.

In addition, a comprehensive public report on the effectiveness and efficiencies of feral pig control tools

has been developed.

An internal-only report on the capacity of Queensland stakeholders to control feral pigs was also

prepared.

See more

Read the publications related to this project and feral pig control and management:

Enhancing strategic deployment of baiting transects for invasive species control – a case study for

feral pig baiting in north-eastern Australia (Wildlife Research, 2024)

Factors influencing the activity ranges of feral pigs (Sus scrofa) across four sites in eastern

Australia (Wildlife Research, 2023)

Feral pig (Sus scrofa) activity and landscape feature revisitation across four sites in eastern

Australia (Australian Mammalogy, 2023)

Feral pig management in Australia: implications for disease control (Australian Veterinary

Journal, 2022)

Feral pig control techniques - A review and discussion of efficacy and efficiency for application in

Queensland (Queensland Government, 2022)

Tags: Complete, Objective 1

Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/animal/health/animal-plan/project-17

• 

• 

• 

• 

•