The pig biosecurity project is a joint initiative funded by the Department of Primary Industries and
Regions, South Australia (PIRSA) and Pork South Australia (SA) via the SA Pig Industry Fund. The
partnership is part of broader government and industry initiatives to enhance biosecurity preparedness
for emergency animal diseases (EADs) across the pork supply chain. The goal is to support market
A survey was undertaken to measure how prepared the SA pig industry was for the biosecurity
requirements of an EAD outbreak. The survey found that strong biosecurity performance was linked to
good health and husbandry practices. It also identified opportunities where targeted projects can
1 – Improve Australia’s preparedness and ability to respond to emergency animal diseases.
3 – Improve the adoption and implementation of biosecurity practices throughout the terrestrial
1.1 – Continue to implement recommendations from emergency responses including EAD
incursions, COVID-19, previous EAD simulation exercises and recent natural disasters.
3.1 – Investigate the benefits and consider developing a national dashboard platform for
government and industry biosecurity information systems, such as South Australia’s One
3.2 – Share knowledge across animal industries and jurisdictions to strengthen quality assurance
programs, on-farm biosecurity systems, biosecurity extension programs and regulatory activities.
3.3 – Conduct more industry-government education and awareness communication activities to
promote a biosecurity ‘culture’ and ‘community of practice’ across animal industries, including
3.4 – Continue developing biosecurity guidelines for the supply chains of novel small-scale

The co-funded SA Pig Biosecurity Project has concluded to support redirection of industry resources
The report on improving piggery biosecurity through the development of resources and digital
The report stimulated discussions between state and national industry organisations. These groups plan
to develop capabilities to further enhance EAD preparedness through national industry-led projects.
The report identified tools and other resources required to support the pig industry to comply with the
expected standards and verify their biosecurity practices in a manner consistent with the best practice
A verification framework was developed in consultation with industry stakeholders and other
enhance on-farm biosecurity practices to reduce the risk of disease introduction and spread
provide guidance to the pig industry on the veracity of practices likely to be accepted by
The results of a biosecurity bench-marking survey were presented and distributed to stakeholders.
A digital form was developed as part of a movement permit preparedness project. It was released to the
collecting information on routine farm movements of pigs (including routes) and other products
Enabling producers to complete the form as part of preparation to apply for movement permits

Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/animal/health/animal-plan/project-52