Overview
The Australian Beef Sustainability Framework (ABSF) is an initiative of the Australian beef industry to
set out the key indicators of its sustainability performance.
The ABSF uses evidence-based metrics to empower industry, and demonstrate its values and
accountability to customers, investors and stakeholders.
The ABSF regularly reviews key topics and areas of focus to address the beef industry’s most significant
impacts, risks and opportunities.
A double materiality assessment that considers financial risks to the industry, as well as the
environmental and social impacts of the industry, offers a range of strategic benefits for the Australian
beef sector.
An assessment aligns the ABSF with emerging global reporting standards such as:
the EU Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive (CSRD)
the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI)
the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS).
This helps maintain market access and regulatory readiness in global export markets.
This assessment approach improves risk management by identifying social and environmental risks
that could have financial or reputational impacts for the industry.
Beyond risk, a double materiality approach enhances strategic decision-making and increases
transparency and credibility with stakeholders. It positions the industry to improve customer
expectations on issues such as emissions reduction and animal welfare.
The double materiality assessment helps ensure the ABSF remains future-focused, inclusive, and
responsive to the evolving regulatory landscape. It will also guide updates to the themes and priorities
for the Australian Beef Sustainability Framework report.
Project Lead: Meat & Livestock Australia (MLA)
Project Contact: info@mla.com.au
Project Status: Complete
Objective alignment:
6 – Implement industry sustainability frameworks and plans.

Activity alignment:
6.1 – Share knowledge (such as the development of benchmarks) between industries to
implement industry sustainability frameworks and plans.
Project updates
August 2025
Objectives
The key objectives of the 2025 materiality assessment were to:
review and refine material topics using a double materiality approach, to ensure they remain
relevant to Australian beef industry and the ABSF
ensure the ABSF continues to align with evolving sustainability standards and frameworks
engage a wide range of key stakeholders to gather input on sustainability priorities, emerging
issues, and industry progress.
The final report includes detailed insights into the analysis process, project context, and
recommendations.
Methodology
The 2025 ABSF materiality assessment followed a structured, multi-phase process:
Phase 1 – Desktop review
This phase involved an extensive review of key industry strategy documents, governance and public
documents provided by MLA. It also reviewed the external landscape, including trends, contemporary
media and regulatory changes. It also involved peer assessment and engagement with other industry
representatives.
Phase 2 – Stakeholder engagement
Environmental Resource Management (ERM) and STR Consulting engaged with internal and external
stakeholders across the beef industry’s value chain. Over 52 organisations and 78 stakeholders
participated through online interviews and surveys, with 54% of stakeholders internal to the beef
industry.
Phase 3 – Identify material topics and define assessment methodology
Based on the findings of phases 1 and 2 and the key impacts, risks and opportunities identified, an
updated list of sustainability topics was developed and refined. An assessment and scoring methodology
was defined and agreed on by the ABSF Steering Group (SG).

Phase 4 – Perform a double materiality assessment
ERM performed the materiality assessment to score and prioritise the most relevant sustainability
topics for the beef industry. These were reflected in a topic ranking and materiality matrix.
Throughout this process, regular consultations were held with the ABSF SG to ensure alignment with
industry needs and stakeholder expectations, as well as to secure sign off on relevant project phases and
milestones.
Results
The 2025 ABSF materiality assessment identified a total of 26 sustainability topics. Thirteen topics
were classified as highly material, indicating their critical importance to the industry’s sustainability
performance, regulatory compliance, and stakeholder expectations. These are:
Animal health & welfare
Biosecurity
Market access
Climate change resilience
Greenhouse gas emissions & carbon capture
Food safety & quality
Deforestation
Livestock transport
Traceability across the value chain
Animal husbandry & handling
Work health & safety
Rural economic & community contribution
Productivity and profitability
The full report will be published on the Australian Beef Sustainability Framework website.
August 2024
MLA engaged a consultant to undertake the materiality assessment. Work began to:
review existing literature
analyse the external landscape
conduct peer reviews
synthesise findings for stakeholder interviews and engagement.
See more
See more about The Australian Beef Sustainability Framework.
Tags: Complete, Objective 6

Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/animal/health/animal-plan/project-60