Overview

The project aims to develop an AMS assessment framework for industries to identify areas for

improvement. This follows on from a previous Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research

Organisation (CSIRO) project – Quantifying antimicrobial usage (AMU) in Australian companion and

production animals.

It will define quantitative and qualitative indicators that can be used to provide context for AMU data.

These indicators will also highlight gaps in AMS that impact all Australian-specific animal health

contexts.

Project Contact: animalplan@aff.gov.au

Project Status: Complete

Objective alignment:

4 – Manage the risk of antimicrobial resistance (AMR).

Activity alignment:

4.1 – Implement AMR activities as identified in the One Health AMR Master Action Plan and

Australia’s Animal Sector AMR Action Plan 2023 to 2028.

Project updates

Future Actions

The project team is developing methodology for using the framework as the basis for conducting a

national-level assessment. This will help to identify areas requiring support across all sectors. The

outcomes of this assessment will suggest improvements that could be made to the Australian Animal

AMR Action Plan.

August 2025

This project is now complete and several new activities have been initiated that will be reported on

separately.

The draft framework has been published as a pre-print. It is planned for journal publication later this

year.

• 

•

May 2025

The draft framework was completed and prepared for publication. The framework is being used as the

basis for a sector-level AMS action plan for the wildlife and zoo sector (partnership between Wildlife

Health Australia and the Zoo and Aquarium Association).

Negotiations with industry groups and sectors are ongoing regarding the process and resources needed

to adapt and complete a national-level AMS assessment.

Discussions with international partners to adapt the process to different country contexts are underway.

February 2025

The AMS Assessment Framework project successfully developed a national framework. It is being

prepared for public release. This framework provides a comprehensive definition of AMS. It has already

been adapted and adopted by several industries. The adapted frameworks for the pig, wildlife and zoo

sectors are nearly finished.

November 2024

The draft framework was completed and was being prepared for publication. A framework for the

wildlife sector was being developed as a sector-level action plan with discussions on expansion to

include the zoo and aquarium sectors.

Negotiations with each industry were ongoing regarding the process and resources needed to adapt and

complete a national level AMS assessment.

See more

One Health AMR Master Action Plan (amr.gov.au)

Australia’s Animal Sector Antimicrobial Resistance Action Plan 2023 to 2028 (agriculture.gov.au)

Quantifying antimicrobial usage (AMU) in Australian companion and production animals

(publication.csiro.au)

Tags: Complete, Objective 4

Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/animal/health/animal-plan/project-53