Australia’s Animal Sector Antimicrobial Resistance (AMR) Action Plan 2023 to 2028 (action plan)
aligns with the 7 objectives of Australia’s National AMR Strategy – 2020 and Beyond. It also lines up
with the priority activities of the One Health Master Action Plan for Australia’s National AMR Strategy
The action plan provides Australia’s terrestrial and aquatic animal health and industry sectors with
4.1 – Implement AMR activities as identified in the One Health AMR Master Action Plan and 
Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) to collate, analyse and report on AMR
surveillance and monitoring data on antimicrobial use in Australian animals. This will include a pilot
A project to inform the development of a risk-based AMR surveillance system is nearing completion
(see May 2025 update). Risk analysis for ten priority drug-bug-host combinations is close to
completion, and next steps are being considered. This project is linked to activities 5.3.1 and 5.3.2 of the
Dairy Australia will soon finalise a project conducting antimicrobial resistance testing to estimate
susceptibility profiles in E. coli (Escherichia) and Enterococcus species from dairy cattle. This work is

A mid-term review of Australia’s Animal Sector AMR Action Plan 2023-2028 has commenced and is
being led by CSIRO with support from DAFF. Outcomes will be summarised in a report and used to
The Animal Health Committee (AHC) AMR Task Group’s workplan has been approved by AHC and will
The AHC agreed at their September 2025 face-to-face meeting to continue the AMR Task Group for
another 12 months. The task group met in December 2025 to begin drafting the workplan for the next
12 months. This was finalised at the meeting in early 2026. The three initial tasks given to the group
DAFF has funded the development of a business case for sustainable funding to undertake national
AMR priority actions and initiatives in animal health (activity 1.1). The business case will be completed
in June 2026 and will support decisions on investment in actions to mitigate the risks of AMR in the
A monitoring and evaluation framework for the animal sector AMR action plan was completed. This
framework will be used to monitor progress towards the plan’s objectives and is linked to activity 1.3.
Since May 2025, the AHC AMR Task Group has continued action on 3 tasks in the action plan that
Creating a communication plan to help government stakeholders respond to questions regarding
Developing AMR surveillance policy advice to guide establishment of a national animal AMR
Consolidating a list of prohibited antimicrobials for use in animals, based on current regulations
and recommendations, to guide discussions and future action on nationally consistent
Project plans are currently on track, and the first drafts outlined in the project plans are awaiting
Additionally, the AHC AMR Task Group was drafting a summary paper outlining the work being done
to measure and report on antimicrobial usage in Australia. This topic is gaining global attention, as
Since October 2024, the AHC AMR Task Group prioritised action on 3 tasks in the action plan that

DAFF commissioned a project to develop a monitoring and evaluation framework for Australia’s
Animal Sector AMR Action Plan 2023 to 2028. This is linked to activity 1.3 and is scheduled to be
DAFF commissioned a project to identify surveillance priorities to inform the development of a risk-
based AMR surveillance system. This project will identify priority drug-bug-host combinations where
AMR surveillance resources should be focused and links to activity 5.3.1 and activity 5.3.2.
Following endorsement of the AMR Task Group’s terms of reference, the group held its first meeting.
The task group identified 3 key deliverables for the first 12 months of operation:
recommendations for a list of antimicrobials to be prohibited for use in animals.
In September 2024, AHC set up an AMR Task Group to identify national priority activities in the action
plan that require government leadership. The group will also consider how to best provide future
New South Wales and Victoria agreed to co-chair the AMR Task Group, to operate for an initial period
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/animal/health/animal-plan/project-44