This information will assist foreign military units and personnel visiting and/or exercising in Australia.
The department import and export inspection and certification is essential to maintaining Australia's highly favourable animal, plant and human health status and access to export markets. All military equipment entering Australia is subject to biosecurity control to minimise the risk of exotic pests and diseases entering the country.
Essential information for military forces
Information for military forces entering Australia can be found on the Essential biosecurity information for military forces webpage.
Essential customs information for military forces entering Australia can be found on the Department of Home Affairs (Home Affairs) website.
Further information on specific biosecurity requirements
Answers to some common questions from military personnel can be found in the frequently asked questions.
Sovereign immunity
The department’s requirements and arrangements for sovereign immunity can be found on the following webpages:
First points of entry
Under the Biosecurity Act 2015, vessels or aircraft entering Australia must enter at a determined first point of entry unless the master or agent has been granted permission by the department to enter a non-determined first point of entry.
Determined points of entry
Determined first points of entry are usually major ports with the necessary infrastructure in place to manage exotic pest and disease risks associated with vessels or aircraft and the goods or passengers they may be carrying.
Vessels or aircraft that have been granted pratique and intend to visit determined first points of entry as subsequent ports during their voyage do not require further permission from the department. However, captains or masters of vessels are legally obligated to notify the department of any changes to the craft health status prior to arrival at the next port of call.
Non-determined first points of entry
Points of entry which are not determined to be first ports of entry may not have suitable facilities or infrastructure to meet biosecurity requirements.
Permission to enter a non-determined first point of entry
Agents or masters of vessels or aircraft intending to visit non- determined first points of entry as the first port of call must apply to the department for permission to enter that port. The application must be made a minimum of 10 days prior to arrival.
Vessels intending to visit non- determined first points of entry as subsequent ports of call must apply to the department for permission under the Biosecurity Act 2015.
- Non-determined first points of entry that are commonly used by military forces include Rockhampton Airport, Bradshaw Field Training Area, RAAF Curtin, Delamere Range and Shoalwater Bay Training Area.
- Permission granted to aircraft are aircraft registration and date specific, therefore individual applications are required for each aircraft.
Permission to unload goods at a non-determined first point of entry
If there are goods that have not been cleared by the department and need to be unloaded at a non-determined first point of entry for those goods, the captain, owner or agent, must apply for permission from the department to unload the goods. Applications must be made a minimum of 10 days prior to arrival.
Goods that necessitate further intervention will need to be relocated to a point of entry with suitable biosecurity facilities. The movement of the goods will need to be undertaken using a transport method approved by the department.
Other Australian Government agencies
The Australian Government Department of Defence manages the environmental impact for all military training areas in Australia.
For information on visa requirements, firearms, weapons, protein supplements, tobacco, alcohol, duty, prohibited imports, illegal drugs and the Tourist Refund Scheme, contact Home Affairs.
For information on the import of medicines, contact the Australian Therapeutic Goods Administration.
Contacts
For all foreign military visiting Australia please contact the department on:
Online enquiries: Military
Phone: 1800 900 090 (in Australia)
Phone: +61 3 8318 6700 (outside Australia)
For queries relating directly to Talisman Sabre, please contact the department on:
Online enquiries: Exercise Talisman
Phone: 1800 900 090 (in Australia)
After Hours: +61 3 8318 6700 (outside Australia)