January 2025

Manage through drought

Newsletter content

Farmers facing drought may be eligible for more government support than they realise.

They can access rural financial counselling, income and tax support, and low interest loans right now if they are in financial need.

These Australian Government programs aren’t tied to drought declarations, so farmers don’t need to wait to check their eligibility.

Many farmers are already accessing measures such as:

Farm Household Allowance

Call the Farmer Assistance Hotline on 132 316 or visit Services Australia for more information.

Rural Financial Counselling Service

Call 1300 771 741 to access free, confidential and independent financial counselling if you’re an eligible primary producers or small businesses experiencing, or at risk of, financial hardship.

Concessional loans

Call 1800 875 675 about a low-cost RIC loan if you’re an eligible farmer or farm-related small businesses in financial need.

Farm Management Deposits

Talk to your accountant about drawing down on any farm management deposit account you may have.

Tax support

Call 1800 806 218 to ask the ATO for more time to lodge and pay tax.

Talk to a registered tax professional about other concessions, such as spreading or deferring profits from the forced disposal or death of livestock.

Social support and wellbeing

Call Lifeline Australia on 13 11 14 for immediate support or visit Head to Health for a list of other services that can help.

Visit drought.gov.au to see if these programs could work for you too.

Social media content

Please tag @daffgov on Twitter and Facebook and Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry on LinkedIn.

Farmers facing drought may be eligible for more government support than they realise.

They can access rural financial counselling, income and tax support, and low interest loans right now if they are in financial need.

These Australian Government programs aren’t tied to drought declarations, so farmers don’t need to wait to check their eligibility.

Visit drought.gov.au to see if these programs could work for you too.