Page 1 of 5 
8 March 2019 
Food Export Review 
Via email: foodexporttaskforce@agriculture.gov.au 
Dear Sir 
RE: Food Export Review 
I refer to the review to examine the interaction between Australia’s food regulation system and the 
growing demand for Australian food exports and the request for public and industry feedback. 
1. About the National Working Party on Grain Protection 
The National Working Party on Grain Protection (NWPGP): 
Is the industry body responsible for providing management and leadership to industry in the 
areas of post-harvest storage, chemical use, market requirements and chemical regulations.  
Is facilitated by Grain Trade Australia. 
Has members across the entire grain supply chain. 
Hosts an annual forum providing participants with the latest research and developments, in 
the area of post-harvest storage and hygiene, chemical usage and outturn tolerances, 
international and domestic market requirements, and regulations. 
Co-ordinates and provides government with industry views on chemicals in use on grain and 
associated products. 
For further details, refer to http://www.graintrade.org.au/nwpgp    
2. Discussion 
a. Australian Food Exports – Prospects for Agri-food Exports 
It is noted in the paper “It suggests Australian food systems are competitive and enjoy a world class 
reputation and good market access. Australian safety and biosecurity and measures standards 
contribute to this – indeed in some markets Australian food regulation systems are regarded as 
providing sufficient assurance and no additional import requirements are imposed. The Australian 
brand often attracts a premium in world markets.” 
In relation to grain exports, Australian grain does indeed have an enviable reputation of complying 
with Australian and importing country chemical residue limits. Whilst there remains a high 
compliance that has been consistently achieved over many years, there remains some low-level 
issues of concern where chemical residue limits have not complied.  
In general, markets do not impose additional requirements on the industry in order to maintain that 
high compliance.  However, additional sampling and testing requirements are infrequently imposed 
as a result of non-compliance. Within this context, it is important that any industry and/or regulatory 
reforms arising from this review: 
Continue to add to the reputation of Australian grain; 
Do not unnecessarily over-burden industry where not providing benefits; and  
Assist the industry to meet ever tightening requirements for residue limits on exported 
grain.

Page 2 of 5 
b. Australian Food Exports – The global trading environment 
It is noted in the paper “Increasingly Australia’s food exports are facing more complex importing 
country requirements and expectations. Chief among these are sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) 
measures. These measures are often imposed to meet legitimate public policy concerns relating to 
biosecurity and food safety standards”. 
It is rare that a market relaxes an existing maximum residue limit (MRL) for a particular chemical / 
commodity situation. More frequently, MRLs are decreased due to a range of factors which may or 
may not be related to food safety per se. These changes are often outside of the Australian 
industry’s control. Despite the ability for Australia to provide a submission seeking a higher MRL 
based on sound scientific justification, at times this has little impact.  
Of most concern to the industry is where: 
Markets are continually decreasing MRLs for non-safety reasons (i.e., public perceptions 
etc.); or  
An MRL does not exist. In this case the lack of an MRL (or a suitable default policy) may 
mean a nil tolerance applies. 
Market MRLs that apply are unclear. Transparency of regulations is a key element of 
international agreements and industry remains frustrated this is not always complied with. 
internationally to pursue overseas country adoption of relevant international protocols. There 
overseas countries to adopt and implement international agreements related to SPS measures. Thus 
ensuring a more valid and fairer trading environment in relation to MRLs that apply in each country.  
requirements where the measures adopted create artificial barriers and additional costs to industry, 
over and above those required under international agreements. For example, where a market 
requires fumigation in Australia at specific rates (sometimes in excess of that legally allowed in 
Australia or required to control the quarantine pest). At times success in removing these regulations 
is achieved, at other times, these efforts are unsuccessful.  
In general in almost all situations there remains significant opportunity for adequate resources to be 
allocated from the government to assist industry to liaise with overseas countries (regulators and 
industry) to reduce these overly burdensome requirements. In most cases the cost benefits for 
industry are significant, yet it appears on some occasions sufficient Government resources are not 
allocated to those high priority issues as identified by industry, for many reasons including: 
Other priorities – for grain or non-grain commodities 
Lack of resources 
c. Regulation of Food in Australia - Agricultural pesticides and veterinary medicines residues 
It is noted in the paper “The object of the food regulatory system is to ensure a high standard of 
public health protection throughout Australia and New Zealand that translates to a high degree of 
consumer confidence in the quality and safety of food produced, processed, sold or exported”.

Page 3 of 5 
The grain industry fully supports that goal and strives to use chemicals and supply grain on the 
domestic and export markets that complies with that intent. Systems are developed and 
implemented to assist industry to comply with the Australian regulations and those that apply 
overseas. 
There remains however difficulty in interpreting and implementation of some of the regulations for 
chemicals within Australia. Specifically: 
The differences in MRLs that are listed by FSANZ (in the Food Code) and APVMA. These arise 
through differing regulatory measures and while there are some avenues for the differences 
to be managed in a timely manner, there remains a significant gap in ability via regulation 
for those differences to be more effectively handled. 
These different MRLs are not adequately managed in terms of industry understanding of the 
applicability of the MRL on domestic and export grains that apply and the reasons for the 
differing MRLs. The opportunity exists for reform in this area to further assist industry 
compliance with those regulations. 
Where chemical residue violations occur and are notified to the relevant authority, trace-
back investigations occur. Again there is opportunity to further clarify regulations that apply 
regarding MRLs and the control of use of chemicals (including “compliance and 
enforcement”) that apply in each State/Territory. Having different regulations in these 
jurisdictions is confusing at times and may lead to inappropriate use of chemicals and 
therefore residues on grain sold as food domestically or at export. Again, the opportunity 
exists to enhance those regulations while at the same time not unnecessarily restricting 
access to vital chemicals needed for pest, weed and pathogen control by industry.  
d. Regulation of Food in Australia - Response to food incidents and recalls 
It is noted in the paper “There is also a mechanism to report food incidents internationally. FSANZ is 
Australia’s International Food Safety Authority Network (INFOSAN) Emergency Contact Point and 
FSANZ notifies the relevant INFOSAN contact point in other countries, DAWR manages the 
international and reputational implications of a food incident”.  
While that may apply to a food safety incident due to a pathogen for example, where a chemical 
residue issue arises on grain supplied overseas, there is no clear mechanism for a response to be 
effectively co-ordinated: 
If an instance arises, the exporter may deal with the issue on a commercial basis and the 
Government may not be advised as there is no legal obligation. 
government agreement. 
It is noted the National Residue Survey is available to industry to support the integrity of Australian 
grain. While that program is a valuable tool to industry, it does not have the necessary “powers” to 
intervene as required when residues are detected on a cargo in transit where the importing country 
MRL is exceeded and the reputation of Australian grain may be at risk if the shipment continues to 
that destination. Discussion on possible solutions in these circumstances is required to ensure that 
the reputation of Australian grain is maintained and not jeopardised.

Page 4 of 5 
e. Emerging Issues and Challenges 
It is noted in the paper “Technological advances in food testing are allowing for a wide range of food 
characteristics to be examined. Examples include DNA testing and the ability for technologies to 
detect chemicals at lower levels than before”. This is an ever increasing trend in markets and will 
continually place Australian grain at risk of violating a market requirement in instances described 
previously such as a missing MRL or where the market has a very low MRL. Contamination through 
the supply chain (even though label directions have been followed) may inadvertently occur, 
detected by the new technology capable of detecting low levels of a chemical (i.e., parts per billion).  
Continued effort is required to educate overseas markets on the trade implications of these 
instances where regulations are not adequate and there is a real risk of rejected cargoes, despite the 
residue level not being a food safety issue. 
The grain industry in relation to chemical use supports the statement that “Australia has strong 
traceability systems in place for many of its agricultural products”. For this reason the grain industry 
is working with the Department to ensure that any Traceability system developed supports and 
enhances the existing system and Australia’s reputation, is cost effective, adds benefit and is not 
unnecessarily burdensome on industry. 
To ensure that industry and government work in partnership on development of tools such as the 
Traceability system and other measures, it is important that government has a clear understanding 
of industry needs. Conversely industry must have an understanding of the regulatory obligations and 
There is a history of development of “packages of promotional material” with best intentions, only 
for that material to not be used to maximum benefit and at worse, left unused. To ensure maximise 
use of somewhat limited government and industry resources and to ensure such tools are produced 
to the benefit of all parties, the opportunity exists for closer co-operation and discussion with 
industry at all levels of Government, both Federally and at the State level. 
f. Summary 
The Australian grain industry welcomes the review and provides the above comments in relation to 
chemical residues on grain. In summary these include: 
Any reforms must add value and improve the reputation of the Australian industry 
Further industry/government partnership arrangements to assist adoption of best practice 
regulations by importing countries 
Review of resources to consider regulatory issues and potential submissions of high priority 
that reduce the cost burden on industry 
Review of relevant State and Federal regulations relating to chemical use and MRLs to 
improve industry understanding and harmonise where appropriate, potentially leading to 
greater compliance 
Review of enforcement powers of government relating to MRL breaches 
Development and ongoing review of advocacy material to promote Australia’s reputation

Page 5 of 5 
We fully support the endeavours government departments (i.e., APVMA, NRS, FSANZ etc.) go to 
assist industry in its marketing efforts and welcome further input into improvements to regulations 
as outlined. 
Should you have any questions on this submission please contact the undersigned. 
Yours sincerely 
Gerard McMullen 
Chair 
National Working Party on Grain Protection