The department controls exports of agricultural products listed or ‘prescribed’ in the Export Control Act
2020 and associated rules.
What we do
The department works closely with internal and external stakeholders to develop and maintain national
certification systems to meet importing country requirements. This includes national oversight of our
service delivery network, instructional material, technical training, verification, and engagement of
stakeholders.
The Certificate Management Group provides management, technical and administrative support on the
policies and procedures that underpin market access for Australian products.
Documentation
Goods prescribed in the legislation require certification to enable entry into the importing country.
Non-prescribed goods only require certification if it is a requirement of the importing country.
If you are experiencing difficulties with an export transaction in relation to government health
documents or related documentation, please seek assistance from the department by contacting your
regional office.
Registration
Some prescribed goods intended for export must be prepared at registered premises. This means that
your premises must be constructed, equipped and operating in an effective and hygienic manner, and
be approved by the department under the Export Control Act and associated rules.
To register your premise, vary your registration or revoke registration, please complete one of the
following application forms:
EX26a – Application to apply for a new registration and/or approved arrangement.
EX26b – Application to vary a registration and/or approved arrangement. 
This includes change of management, company details, operations, and structural changes
EX26c – Application to revoke a registration and/or approved arrangement or revoke the current
occupier and update the registration with a new occupier.
The above application forms can be found on the web page Application to register an export
establishment.
The application forms can be completed online and sent directly to the Certificate Management Group
via exportestablishment@awe.gov.au. The application may be assessed by relevant technical areas,
including the Fit and Proper Persons Team.
• 
• 
◦ 
•

Approved applications will receive a registration certificate with a unique establishment number.  The
certificate must be displayed at the location of the registered export premise. Contact Export
establishment registration for further information.
Licensing
Individuals, partnerships, and companies exporting edible meat, offal (including casings) or meat
products of cattle, sheep or goats must be licensed under the Export Control Act 2020.
Exporters of meat and meat products must apply to the department for a licence to export meat.
Licensed meat exporters must be accredited by AUS-MEAT, the meat industry standards body.
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/export/from-australia/documentation-registration-licensing