Key issues
In the week ending 26 August 2026, cold fronts and low-pressure systems brought rainfall to
large areas of central and southern Australia.
Across cropping regions in southern Queensland, much of New South Wales, Victoria and
South Australia, falls of up to 50 millimetres were recorded.
These falls are expected to continue to support strong crop and pasture growth across
southern New South Wales, South Australia and Victoria, and provide a timely boost to soil
moisture levels across northern New South Wales and southern Queensland following an
extended period of dry conditions.
Over the 8 days to 3 September 2026, rainfall is expected in parts of south-eastern and most of
south-western Australia.
Cropping regions in Western Australia are forecast to receive 5-50 millimetres of rainfall,
while parts of Victoria and southern New South Wales are likely to see 5-10 millimetres.
In contrast, conditions are expected to be mainly dry across most cropping regions in New
South Wales, northern Victoria, South Australia, and Queensland.
The national rainfall outlook for September to November 2026 indicates an increased probability
of below median rainfall across much of south-eastern Australia as well as parts of the east and
far southwest of the country.
The current rainfall outlook for September to November 2026 suggests an increased
chance of below average falls across most cropping regions in south-eastern Australia, and
mixed expected falls in Western Australia. However, favourable soil moisture levels across
most of Australia’s southern growing regions means that if forecast spring rainfall totals of
between 25-100 millimetres are realised, these falls are likely be sufficient to support the
development and maturation of winter crops. However, due to limited stored soil moisture
across large areas of northern New South Wales and Queensland, below average expected
spring rainfall totals continue to represent an ongoing downside production risk for the
2026–27 winter and summer cropping seasons in these areas.
Water storage levels in the Murray-Darling Basin (MDB) increased by 340 gigalitres (GL)
between 20 August 2026 and 27 August 2026. The current volume of water held in storages is
14,208 GL, equivalent to 64% of total storage capacity. This is 4% or 673 GL less than the same
time last year. Water storage data is sourced from the Bureau of Meteorology (BOM).
Allocation prices in the Victorian Murray below the Barmah Choke increased from $319/ML on
20 August 2026 to $325/ML on 27 August 2026. Trade from the Goulburn to the Murray is
closed. Trade downstream through the Barmah Choke is closed. Trade from the Murrumbidgee to
the Murray is closed.
Full report
Weekly Australian Climate, Water and Agricultural update
Read the full report for the week ending 27 August 2026
• 
◦ 
◦ 
• 
◦ 
◦ 
• 
◦ 
• 
•

Water
Water storages, water markets and water allocations - current week
The Tableau dashboard may not meet accessibility requirements. For information about the contents of
these dashboards contact ABARES.
Commodities
Information on weekly price changes in agricultural commodities is now available at the Weekly
commodity price update.
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/abares/products/weekly_update/weekly-update-260827