Improving access to imported food safety requirements
Imported food safety requirements are now included in the Biosecurity Import Conditions system (BICON).
See more about the Inclusion of food safety requirements in BICON.
All biosecurity requirements must be met before Imported Food Inspection Scheme requirements apply.
Check our Biosecurity Import Conditions system (BICON) for biosecurity import conditions for Insect and arachnid products for human consumption.
Food type
The following insects/insect larvae species may be grown and processed for human consumption in whole, ground or paste form:
- Zophobas morio (super mealworm)
- Achaeta domestica (house crickets)
- Tenebrio molitor (mealworm beetle).
No arachnids or other insects/larvae are currently approved for human consumption.
To import species not included on the list above, submit an enquiry to FSANZ for novel foods assessment to establish their safety before they are sold as a food or as an ingredient in food. See food safety risks section below for further information.
Inspection and testing
This food is classified as a surveillance food.
We refer consignments for inspection to conduct a visual and label assessment at the rate of 5%.
Exclusions
Food from New Zealand.
Food safety risks
Food Standards Australia New Zealand’s (FSANZ) Advisory Committee for Novel Foods (ACNF) has undertaken an assessment of the above three insect species for human consumption, as published in the Record of Views. This Committee determined that while these three insect species are not traditional foods, no food safety concerns were identified and therefore they can be sold as food or used as an ingredient in food. However, labelling of the true nature of the food is required. Due to the possible presence of allergenic proteins or proteins cross-reacting with allergens the label should indicate the presence of insect protein which may affect people who are sensitive to shellfish products. Warning statements and declarations must comply with Standard 1.2.3 of the Australia New Zealand Food Standards Code.
Further information on edible insects is published by the NSW Food Authority.
Version history
| Date | Amendment details | 
|---|---|
| 17/06/2024 | Updated to include arachnids and clarify permissions | 
| 25/08/2023 | First version of the webpage published on website. |