Improving access to imported food safety requirements
Imported food safety requirements are now included in the Biosecurity Import Conditions system (BICON).
See more about the Inclusion of food safety requirements in BICON.
All biosecurity requirements must be met before Imported Food Inspection Scheme requirements apply.
Check our Biosecurity Import Conditions system (BICON) for biosecurity import conditions.
Poultry includes fowls, ducks, geese, turkeys, pigeons, pheasants, quails, guinea fowls, muttonbirds and other avian species ordinarily consumed as food by humans. It does not include ratites (for example, emus and ostriches).
Raw poultry meat and edible poultry offal
Raw poultry meat and edible poultry offal that is fresh, chilled or frozen is classified as surveillance food.
You cannot import any of these products into Australia because there are no biosecurity import conditions that apply to raw poultry meat and raw poultry products including edible poultry offal.
Cooked poultry meat
Poultry meat that is cooked and ready-to-eat is classified as risk food.
Find out about our requirements for poultry meat that is cooked and ready-to-eat.
Cooked poultry pâté, paste and livers
Poultry pâté, pastes and livers that are cooked and ready-to-eat are classified as risk food.
Find out about our requirements for cooked poultry pâté and poultry livers.
Glossary
Ready-to-eat
Food is ready-to-eat if it is ordinarily consumed in the same state as that in which it is sold.
To avoid doubt, food is not ordinarily consumed in the same state as that in which it is sold if, before it is consumed, it requires further processing (such as cooking) to reduce any pathogenic microorganisms potentially present in the food to safe levels.
Retorted
Animal products are retorted if they are heated in a hermetically sealed container to a minimum core temperature of 100°C, obtaining an F0 value of at least 2.8.
Shelf stable
Goods are shelf stable if the:
- goods have been commercially manufactured
- goods have been packaged by the manufacturer
- goods are in that package
- package has not been opened or broken
- goods are able to be stored in the package at room or ambient temperature, and
- goods do not require refrigeration or freezing before the package is opened.
Version history
| Date | Amendment details | 
|---|---|
| 23/01/2025 | First version of the webpage published on website. |