Improving access to imported food safety requirements
Imported food safety requirements are now included in the Biosecurity Import Conditions system (BICON).
See more about the Inclusion of food safety requirements in BICON.
All biosecurity requirements must be met before Imported Food Inspection Scheme requirements apply.
There are no biosecurity import conditions that currently apply to uncooked ready-to-eat meat products. This means you cannot import any of these products into Australia.
Check our Biosecurity Import Conditions system (BICON) for biosecurity import conditions.
The imported food requirements specified here will only apply when an uncooked processed meat is permitted under the Biosecurity Act 2015.
We classify imported food that presents a potential medium or high risk to public health as risk food. All risk food is listed in the Imported Food Control Order 2019.
Uncooked ready-to-eat meat is classified as risk food
This includes:
- uncooked dried meat (for example, jerky, biltong)
- uncooked sausages (for example, salami, cacciatore, chorizo)
- uncooked spreadable sausages (for example, mettwurst, teewurst, schmierwurst).
It does not include uncooked slow dry cured ready-to-eat ham. For example, Iberian ham, Parma ham, Serrano ham and prosciutto.
Only uncooked ready-to-eat meat that is covered by a recognised foreign government certificate can be imported. See current certification arrangements.
Current certification arrangements
No recognised foreign government certification arrangements are currently in place.
Food safety risks
Food Standards Australia New Zealand (FSANZ) has given us advice about the risk of uncooked ready-to-eat dried meat, sausages and spreadable sausages.
These products present a potential medium or high risk to public health for:
- Salmonella spp.
- Shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli (STEC).
Uncooked ready-to-eat spreadable sausages also present a potential medium or high risk for:
- staphylococcal enterotoxin
- Listeria monocytogenes.
To make sure there are food safety controls in place to manage this hazard, imports must be covered by a recognised foreign government certificate. We verify these controls are effective by conducting analytical testing.
Glossary
Ready-to-eat
Food is ready-to-eat if it is ordinarily consumed in the same state as that in which it is sold.
To avoid doubt, food is not ordinarily consumed in the same state as that in which it is sold if, before it is consumed, it requires further processing (such as cooking) to reduce any pathogenic microorganisms potentially present in the food to safe levels.
Version history
| Date | Reference number | Amendment details | 
|---|---|---|
| 28/11/2018 | UMP 11/2018 | Consolidated webpages for Uncooked manufactured or processed meat which that is ready-to-eat and Ready-to-eat uncooked dried meat, sausages and spreadable sausages. | 
| 12/10/2016 | UMP 09/2016 | Changes to the risk food to reflect risk statement prepared by Food Standards Australia New Zealand. | 
| 01/05/2014 | UMP 05/2014 | Replaces Imported Food Notice 09/12 Tests applied to risk category foods |