1 
Improving market transparency in perishable agricultural goods 
industries 
Seafood industry second workshop 7 September 2021: 
Workshop communique 
Background 
In late 2020, the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) conducted an inquiry into 
bargaining power imbalances in supply chains for perishable agricultural goods (PAG) in Australia. 
The inquiry recommended that the government explore measures to increase price transparency in 
PAG industries to increase competition in those industries. 
Agriculture, Water and the Environment (DAWE) has committed $5.4 million to improve price and 
market transparency in PAG industries by: 
delivering co-design workshops with PAG industries to understand their market transparency 
issues, opportunities and requirements 
delivering a grants program to develop and implement tailored mechanisms to improve price and 
market transparency. 
The workshops provide an opportunity for participants to discuss price and market transparency 
issues in their sector, brainstorm ideas to improve transparency and co-design the details of solutions 
going forward. 
Workshop 2 outcomes 
Nineteen industry and government representatives attended the second seafood price and market 
transparency workshop. The objective of the second workshop was to generate concepts for potential 
projects for the grants program, and to identify further areas of work that can be undertaken outside 
of this program. 
Prior to breaking out into small groups, two organisations provided an overview of some projects 
underway of interest to the industry: 
Seafood Industry Association – Harmonised Australian Retailer Produce Scheme (HARPS) and 
Our Pledge 
Sydney Fish Market – Digital trading platform.

2 
Participants (Appendix A) worked in small groups that prioritised the following opportunities, which 
they ranked: 
1) Digital tools – Industry e-commerce; traceability; digitisation of supply chains, including 
blockchain. 
2) General process – Improved collection, storage and dissemination of timely market information; 
more informed price and market data. 
3) Consumer awareness – Increased consumer education; increased consumer awareness of positive 
characteristics. 
4) Industry specific – Increasing the scope and application of the SIA pledge; HARPS could be 
considered for the seafood industry (did not progress following prioritisation). 
The top three opportunities were selected and prioritised. Participants noted their difficulty in 
selecting a preferred project, as all three were viewed favourably. 
1) Digital tools – traceability and provenance (45%). 
2) General process – data collection, analysis and dissemination (27%). 
3) Consumer awareness – public relations campaign (27%). 
Following small group discussions on the priorities, the whole group then came together to consider 
each idea, identify gaps and discuss which project should be progressed, for either application to 
grants funding during the first half of 2022 or for industry-led development. 
Table 1 provides an overview of the potential projects that were workshopped by participants. 
Participants shared details of projects for digital tools to improve traceability and provenance that 
were being used or developed, including: 
Australian Dairy Farmers Traceability Guidelines 
Laava Global Mark of Trust 
Australian AgriFood Data Exchange project prospectus. 
Next steps 
The industry is now encouraged to continue working with key stakeholders in the industry to further 
develop the potential projects.

3 
Table 1 Potential projects 
Digital tools 
Create a secure and 
independent digital tool 
to improve transparency 
about traceability and 
provenance. 
Improve traceability so consumers would 
better trust seafood products in relation to 
their: 
• Provenance 
• Food safety 
• Certifications. 
The tool would include three components: 
• Data – reference data set 
• Digital transformation – flow of 
information of reference data 
• Value add – verification tool. 
The tool would connect to e-commerce 
solutions and would have the potential to 
improve the customer experience. 
The tool would also have the potential to 
reduce back of house assessments. 
Work with stakeholders who are already 
developing similar tools, including: 
• Fisheries Research Development 
Corporation 
• Global Dialogue for Seafood 
Traceability 
• Laava 
• Oysters Australia (miShell, Smart 
Oysters, Oyster Cloud) 
• CSIRO. 
While a commercial off-the-shelf solution 
may not be available, working with 
stakeholders to leverage existing tools may 
reduce time and cost. 
Supply chain – a project would need to consider the 
supply chain reach. For example, it would prove easier 
for packaged goods with labels, more challenging for 
other goods. The tool should allow for real time 
assessment so it can be used quickly at each point in the 
supply chain. 
Data security and governance – a project should build 
trust that data is used appropriately with appropriate 
security. Apply protocols and controls to provide 
reassurance and allow verification without being seen 
as a policing tool. Provide an independent rating system. 
Future proof – a project should look to avoid vendor and 
technology lock-in; keep data accessible; and consider 
whether the data can be open. 
Value proposition and return on investment – a project 
should be wary that user costs wouldn’t lead to higher 
prices for products. Specifically, the tool should be 
competitive. 
Seafood industry – product development should take 
into account the fragmented nature of the seafood 
industry. 
General process 
A single source of data 
collected from a range of 
sources and published on 
a web portal. 
Data collection, analysis and 
dissemination. 
The portal needs to be mobile accessible 
(app as well as web) and contain a library 
of information. 
The portal would be developed as a proof 
of concept first with a pilot rolled out to 
one sector of the seafood industry before 
incrementally rolling out to all segments. 
The portal could potentially be 
subscription-based. 
Real-time, quarterly and monthly 
dissemination of data. 
Work with stakeholders who already collect 
a range of data that can be collated. Some 
data will need to be aggregated to maintain 
competition privacy. 
Annual data – ABARES 
Quarterly data – Oysters Australia survey 
Realtime data – State Government quota 
and production data, SFM trading data, 
aggregated farmgate, retail scan data, 
aggregate wholesalers’ data. 
Data standards/integrity – a project should consider the 
type of data, so it can be well defined to ensure that 
inputs are standardised across the industry (for 
example, definition of price). 
Willingness to share information – a project would 
aggregate data from some sources to ensure privacy of 
data, and to ensure no breach to competition law will 
encourage companies/individuals to provide that data. 
Complexity of industry – a project would take into 
account the complexity of the industry, specifically its 
significant variations between sectors, including wild 
catch versus farmed, seasonality of product, contractual 
arrangements between farmers and 
wholesalers/retailers.

4 
An independent or semi-independent body 
to host/manage the portal, for example: 
• Seafood Industry Australia Fisheries 
Research Development Corporation 
(FRDC) 
The FRDC is best positioned to facilitate 
data interchange to allow pre-competitive 
data sharing (act as the app store not 
developer). 
Concurrent work underway – a project should look to 
build on/leverage other benchmarking systems being 
developed for comparison and decision making. 
Consumer awareness 
Public relations 
campaign to raise the 
seafood industry’s 
profile. 
Ideally, consumer awareness about the 
seafood industry would be raised through 
a public relations campaign. This would be 
a coordinated effort across the industry to 
communicate good news stories about the 
seafood industry. 
Other options to raise consumer 
awareness could include: 
• Partnership with 
retailers/supermarkets that have 
aligned values, to communicate to 
consumers. 
• Direct consumer marketing 
campaign. (This was excluded due to 
the cost). 
The campaign would focus on telling the 
story: 
• What – stewardship of marine 
environment; provenance, country of 
origin; assure quality 
• How – edutainment; messaging 
opportunities. 
Importantly, this campaign would serve a 
dual purpose of informing consumers and 
attracting talent/capital. 
A range of businesses across the supply 
chain (including wholesalers) who are 
interested in supporting a coordinated 
public relations effort will need to have 
some traditional and social media training. 
The Seafood Industry Association would 
likely coordinate the public relations effort, 
but the whole industry would have a role. 
The Seafood Industry Association may also 
coordinate a partnership with retailers and 
supermarkets for a values alignment effort. 
Funding – a project would need to consider a sustainable 
funding model to support an industry-wide campaign 
and to access talent. 
Return on investment – a project should demonstrate to 
industry a return on investment to justify the resourcing 
required (finance and/or labour hours) to develop and 
implement a campaign. 
Wholesaler – the role of wholesalers should be 
considered. 
Tactics – there are a range of platforms a project could 
consider using as a hook to a campaign, including the 
SIA Industry Pledge. Other specific tactical 
considerations may include research, timing, and 
messaging.

5 
Appendix A: Participant list 
Humpty Doo Barramundi 
Petuna 
Sydney Fish Markets 
Austral Fisheries 
Western Rock Lobster Council 
Oysters Australia 
SA Oyster Growers 
NSW Professional Fishermen’s Association 
Seafood Industry Australia 
Fisheries Research Development Corporation 
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission 
DAWE Fisheries Branch 
DAWE Agricultural Policy Division 
© Commonwealth of Australia 2021 
Commonwealth of Australia (referred to as the Commonwealth). 
All material in this publication is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Licence except content 
supplied by third parties, logos and the Commonwealth Coat of Arms. 
care and skill in preparing and compiling the information and data in this publication. Notwithstanding, the Department of 
Agriculture, Water and the Environment, its employees and advisers disclaim all liability, including liability for negligence 
and for any loss, damage, injury, expense or cost incurred by any person as a result of accessing, using or relying on any of 
the information or data in this publication to the maximum extent permitted by law.