1 
Improving market transparency in perishable agricultural goods 
industries 
Chicken meat industry second workshop 
28 September 2021: Workshop communique 
Background 
In late 2020, the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) conducted an inquiry into 
bargaining power imbalances in supply chains for perishable agricultural goods (PAG). The inquiry 
recommended that the government explore measures to increase price transparency in PAG 
industries to increase competition in those industries. 
Agriculture, Water and the Environment (DAWE) has committed $5.4 million to improve price and 
market transparency in PAG industries by: 
delivering co-design workshops with PAG industries to understand their market transparency 
issues, opportunities and requirements 
delivering a grants program to develop and implement tailored mechanisms to improve price and 
market transparency. 
The workshops provide an opportunity for participants to discuss price and market transparency 
issues in their sector, brainstorm ideas to improve transparency and co-design the details of solutions 
going forward. 
Workshop 2 outcomes 
Fifteen industry and government representatives attended the second workshop for chicken meat 
growers to progress opportunities to improve price and market transparency. The workshop’s 
objective was to generate ideas for potential projects that could either form the basis of a proposal in 
the department’s upcoming grants program or be progressed outside of this program. 
Participants (Appendix A) worked in small groups to progress concepts for 2 opportunities that were 
identified in the first workshop: 
1) Benchmarking/data sharing/modelling 
2) Develop a code of conduct

2 
Individuals self-selected themselves into 2 working groups to generate ideas for each of these 
projects, which considered: 
Purpose – project’s intended outcome 
Details – the project’s scope 
Stakeholders – the people or organisations that would manage or contribute to developing, 
implementing, and maintaining the project 
Risks and benefits – the risks that could impact the project and their mitigation strategies, as well 
as the long-term benefits of the project. 
Groups then presented their project ideas to each other to gather further input and discuss next steps.  
Table 1 provides an overview of the potential projects that were developed. 
Overall, the group considered both projects to be interlinked with the code of conduct taking priority 
and enabling the benchmarking project. The group considered the merits of both a voluntary and 
mandatory code of conduct (preferred). 
The outcomes of the workshop, including the potential projects, will be summarised and presented to 
the processors group at a separate workshop.

3 
Table 1 Potential projects 
Data sharing and benchmarking 
across the supply chain to address 
information asymmetries and build 
price indexes. For example, this 
could include data on: 
• prices 
• costs 
• debt levels 
• contract lengths and renewals. 
Data would be de-identified and 
aggregated to provide a layer of 
security and commercial 
confidentiality for all parties. 
Benchmarking could be dynamic 
based on live data or static based on 
data collected annually. It may need 
to start as a basic tool and build on 
the data over time. 
Two examples in the dairy industry 
could provide guidance on an 
appropriate tool, depending on 
whether the project is enabled by a 
code of conduct: 
• The Dairy Farm Monitor 
• The Milk Value Portal 
Address information asymmetries across the supply 
chain, including greater transparency about who is 
paying for different costs. 
Provide a fairer playing ground with increased 
understanding of price signals, tenure, returns on 
investment. 
Produce publication of data identifying lines of 
profitability. 
Provide data that helps governments to design 
policy and industry support. 
Won’t address many of the problems in the industry, 
such as the complexity of contracts and security of 
tenure – mitigated by a code of conduct. 
Data holders may not be willing to share data – 
mitigation includes mandated in a code of conduct 
or incentivised by working towards a benchmarking 
tool that provides benefits across the industry. 
Accuracy of data – mitigated by publishing the data 
(accountability) and de-identification of data. 
One element of a toolkit to solve bigger problems in 
price transparency. 
Addresses information asymmetries. 
Demonstrates unfairness in the industry, for 
example different pricing for growers in different 
states, thus enabling more balanced approach 
nationally. 
The project could be taken forward by the 
National Farmers Federation and the 
Australian Chicken Growers Council, 
working with their state bodies. 
Consultation and collaboration with 
Commonwealth and State agriculture 
departments during the development 
stage. 
Consultation and collaboration with 
processors, retailers, and the food service 
sector, who hold much of the data. 
Much of the data is unavailable publicly, 
but some available information includes 
pool system prices – annual figure. 
Industry bodies such as the VFF hold 
information on initial capital investment 
and potential return. 
Processors hold information across the 
supply chain with each company holding 
their own information. 
Opportunity to partner with retailers and 
the food service sector for data inputs. 
Need to provide incentives as well as 
aggregate and de-identify information to 
encourage data sharing. 
Requires further analysis to identify the 
most useful inputs. 
There are no similar initiatives 
existing in the industry to 
leverage. 
The first step would be to 
conduct a cost-benefit analysis. 
Benchmarking would form part 
of a voluntary or mandatory code 
of conduct.

4 
Code of conduct 
A code of conduct would be based 
on risk apportionment and 
principles of fairness and acting in 
good faith.  
Specifically, it could include 
minimum terms for contracts, such 
as: 
• pool payment system terms 
• minimum pricing 
• termination of contracts 
• quality assessments 
• payments for facility 
upgrades/maintenance. 
The code may also include a 
standard contract. 
Other matters which the code 
would likely deal with include: 
• provision of an adequate 
dispute resolution and an 
arbitration mechanism 
• provision of historical data 
reported annually – price 
points and price data enabling 
• details for engaging with 
collective bargaining. 
Appropriate risk apportioning between different 
stakeholders that would: 
• protect growers against retribution 
• provide oversight on contracts and removal of 
potentially unfair contract terms 
• regulate industry contracts and clarity for 
growers on pricing and future investment 
• create price transparency across whole supply 
chain. 
Processors not supplying price data – mitigated by 
aggregating data. 
No action or change from a voluntary code – 
mitigated by a mandatory code. 
Watered down code – mitigated by ensuring 
government is at the table. 
Mandatory code does not have compulsion for post-
contractual arbitration – possible mitigation would 
relate to code contract terms including arbitration 
mechanisms. 
Unfair contract conditions imposed – mitigation 
could include standard contracts. 
A code of conduct would: 
• create a fair market which in turn creates 
willingness to innovate and invest – decrease in 
investment cost 
• manage risks appropriately making the supply 
chain more efficient 
• improve transparency and profit distribution 
across supply chain 
• improve time management through less 
requirement for lengthy negotiations. 
Government stakeholders identified for 
being involved in the development and 
management of a code: 
and the Environment 
• ACCC 
• Treasury 
Industry stakeholders identified for 
collaboration and consultation: 
• Chicken meat industry supply chain 
– growers (representative bodies), 
processors (APIA), retailers. 
• RSPCA and FREPA (e.g. set 
standards for upgrading conversion 
of infrastructure to support free-
range production) 
• Consumer representatives 
(e.g. Choice). 
Funding and resourcing (skills) required 
would include: 
• professional legal advice 
• facilitation and negotiation 
• stakeholder engagement – to deliver 
and manage 
• project 
management/communication. 
The group noted it’s preference 
for a mandatory code, rather 
than a voluntary code. 
Government participants 
explained a policy decision would 
need to be taken to support this 
proposal. 
National Farmers Federation 
would take this project forward 
in consultation with: 
• NSW Farmers Association 
• Victorian Farmers 
Federation 
• Australian Chicken Growers’ 
Council. 
The initial steps to produce a 
code would include: 
1) Professional legal advice to 
draft substance of code. 
2) Stakeholder engagement 
across the industry. 
Once a progressed draft is 
available, stakeholders would 
work with the Department of 
Agriculture, Water and the 
Environment and other 
government agencies.

5 
Appendix A: Participant list 
AgriFutures Australia 
Australian Chicken Meat Federation 
National Farmers’ Federation 
Victorian Farmers Federation 
New South Wales Farmers Association 
Australian Chicken Growers Council 
Golden Cockerel 
Turosi 
Inghams 
Woolworths 
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission 
DAWE Agricultural Policy 
© Commonwealth of Australia 2021 
Commonwealth of Australia (referred to as the Commonwealth). 
All material in this publication is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Licence except content 
supplied by third parties, logos and the Commonwealth Coat of Arms. 
care and skill in preparing and compiling the information and data in this publication. Notwithstanding, the Department of 
Agriculture, Water and the Environment, its employees and advisers disclaim all liability, including liability for negligence 
and for any loss, damage, injury, expense or cost incurred by any person as a result of accessing, using or relying on any of 
the information or data in this publication to the maximum extent permitted by law.