1 
Improving market transparency in perishable agricultural goods 
industries 
Chicken meat industry first workshop 24 August 2021: 
Workshop communique 
Background 
In late 2020, the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) conducted an inquiry into 
bargaining power imbalances in supply chains for perishable agricultural goods (PAG) in Australia. 
The inquiry recommended that the government explore measures to increase price transparency in 
PAG industries to increase competition in those industries. 
Agriculture, Water and the Environment (DAWE) has committed $5.4 million to improve price and 
market transparency in PAG industries by: 
delivering co-design workshops with PAG industries to understand their market transparency 
issues, opportunities and requirements 
delivering a grants program to develop and implement tailored mechanisms to improve price and 
market transparency. 
The workshops provide an opportunity for participants to discuss price and market transparency 
issues in their sector, brainstorm ideas to improve transparency and co-design the details of solutions 
going forward. 
Workshop outcomes 
Eighteen industry and government representatives attended the first chicken meat price and market 
transparency workshop. The objective of the first workshop was to discover and analyse the issues, 
barriers and opportunities to achieve market and price transparency in the chicken meat industry. 
Participants (Appendix A) worked in small groups that explored: 
Issues – Negative characteristics within the chicken meat industry that decrease price and market 
transparency. 
Barriers – Negative characteristics external to the chicken meat industry that decrease price and 
market transparency. 
Internal opportunities – Positive characteristics that exist within the chicken meat industry that 
can potentially increase price and market transparency. 
External opportunities – Positive characteristics outside the chicken meat industry that can 
potentially increase price and market transparency.

2 
Throughout this process, issues and barriers (and consequently, opportunities) were categorised as 
either legislative, regulatory, industry specific, general process, technology driven, consumer driven 
and other (for example, environmental). 
Participants agreed that there is a lack of transparency in the chicken meat industry, however there 
were disparate views about the impact on the industry. The processor representatives broadly 
considered that there was no evidence that a lack of transparency created a problem, as the market 
was operating effectively under the current system. While the grower representatives considered that 
the lack of transparency was a significant issue, as growers don’t have the market information to 
understand pricing and make important business decisions. 
Table 1 identifies and categorises the key themes of issues, barriers and opportunities identified at 
the workshop. It should be noted that there were a diverse range of views raised in this workshop and 
Table 1 does not represent an agreed industry position. 
Table 1 Issues, barriers and opportunities 
Category 
Issue/Barrier 
Opportunity 
Regulatory 
Unequal bargaining power between 
growers and processors that is perceived 
to manifest in price inequity. 
An Industry code of conduct that would 
include principles of price transparency, 
supply chain costing and dispute resolution 
mechanisms. 
Chicken meat industry 
Price signalling not coming to the grower 
and information asymmetry. 
Complex pool system and contracts are 
opaque – no transparency between or 
within regions on how price is determined 
and how criteria are used to assess price. 
Architecture exists to enable contractual 
mechanisms for data sharing. 
Forward contracting for those growers on 
shorter term contracts (less than 5 years in 
length). 
Forward physical and financial modelling 
for regions; making information available 
to growers before they invest. 
Process 
Benchmarking in pricing is not available to 
growers including cost of production, 
wholesale and retail. 
Frameworks and processes in play to 
enable benchmarking, including return on 
investment data. 
Information 
Lack of information transparency; growers 
not able to verify market or information 
provided by supply chain. 
Index pricing based on data, collated and 
managed by independent body. 
Government to publish pricing, for 
example, through ABARES, ABS. 
Environmental 
Getting to Net Zero 2050 – who and how 
will it impact? Who will pay for that 
impact? 
Forward modelling for regions, similar to 
dairy farm monitoring project for the dairy 
industry. 
Priority opportunities 
The following priority opportunities were identified by grower representatives but do not represent 
an agreed industry position by processors: 
Potentially a voluntary code of conduct OR mandatory code of conduct to include price 
transparency, supply chain costing and dispute resolution mechanisms. 
Benchmarking and data sharing on process, costs and returns. 
Government or independent body to collate and publish price or index.

3 
Next steps 
The outcomes of the first workshop provide the basis for generating ideas for potential solutions to 
improve price and market transparency in the chicken meat industry. 
Ideas generation will be co-designed by participants in future workshops.

4 
Appendix A: Participant list 
AgriFutures Australia 
Australian Chicken Meat Federation 
National Farmers Federation 
Victorian Farmers Federation 
New South Wales Farmers Association 
Australian Chicken Growers Council 
Golden Cockerel 
Turosi 
Inghams 
Woolworths 
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission 
DAWE Agricultural Policy 
© Commonwealth of Australia 2021 
Commonwealth of Australia (referred to as the Commonwealth). 
All material in this publication is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Licence except content 
supplied by third parties, logos and the Commonwealth Coat of Arms. 
care and skill in preparing and compiling the information and data in this publication. Notwithstanding, the Department of 
Agriculture, Water and the Environment, its employees and advisers disclaim all liability, including liability for negligence 
and for any loss, damage, injury, expense or cost incurred by any person as a result of accessing, using or relying on any of 
the information or data in this publication to the maximum extent permitted by law.