1 
Improving market transparency in perishable agricultural goods 
industries 
Chicken meat industry fourth workshop 
1 November 2021: Workshop communique 
Background 
In late 2020, the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) conducted an inquiry into 
bargaining power imbalances in supply chains for perishable agricultural goods (PAG) in Australia. 
The inquiry recommended that the government explore measures to increase price transparency in 
PAG industries to increase competition in those industries. 
Agriculture, Water and the Environment (DAWE) has committed $5.4 million to improve price and 
market transparency in PAG industries by: 
delivering co-design workshops with PAG industries to understand their market transparency 
issues, opportunities and requirements 
delivering a grants program to develop and implement tailored mechanisms to improve price and 
market transparency. 
The workshops provide an opportunity for participants to discuss price and market transparency 
issues in their sector, brainstorm ideas to improve transparency and co-design the details of solutions 
going forward. 
Workshop 4 outcomes 
Five industry and government representatives (Appendix A) attended a workshop for chicken meat 
corporate growers to review and discuss the issues, barriers, opportunities, and potential projects to 
improve price and market transparency, which were raised by the industry in previous workshops. 
The purpose of this workshop was to test the ideas raised by chicken meat growers and processors at 
previous workshops and discuss other potential concepts that could be considered as part of future 
projects. The future projects would aim to improve price and market transparency for the chicken 
meat sector and could either form the basis of a proposal in the department’s upcoming grants 
program or be progressed outside of this program. 
The views and concepts raised by the workshop in response to the issues, barriers and opportunities 
raised during previous workshops are summarised in Table 1.

2 
Table 1 - Industry issues, barriers and opportunities 
Category 
Issue or barrier 
Additional views 
Regulatory 
• Unequal bargaining power 
between growers and 
processors that is perceived to 
manifest in price inequity. 
• An Industry code of conduct that 
would include principles of price 
transparency, price determination, 
supply chain costing and dispute 
resolution mechanisms. 
• Unequal bargaining power can exist, particularly where there is 
no competition amongst processors in a region. 
• Pricing and contract issues are different and should be dealt with 
separately. 
• Code of Conduct is about how a contract might work rather than 
details of pricing. 
Chicken meat 
industry 
• Price signalling not coming to 
the grower and information 
asymmetry in the supply 
chain. 
• Complex pool system and 
contracts are opaque: no 
transparency between or 
within regions on how price is 
determined and what criteria 
is used to assess price. 
• Architecture exists to enable 
contractual mechanisms for data 
sharing. 
• Forward contracting for those 
growers on shorter term contracts – 
less than 5 years in length. 
• Forward physical and financial 
modelling for regions; making 
information available to growers 
before they invest. 
• Signals/data to indicate when a processor might close a plant in a 
region before a grower invests is important. This may not be 
discoverable during the due diligence process. 
• The relationship between growers and processors is very 
important as growers are looking after the processors’ chickens. 
• Not looking for through-supply chain transparency, rather 
transparency on the costs associated with growing. 
• More concerned about terms of contracts and when contracts 
come up for renewal. 
Process 
• Benchmarking in pricing is 
not available to growers 
including cost of production, 
wholesale and retail. 
• Frameworks and processes in play to 
enable benchmarking, including 
return on investment data. 
• Growers provide the facility and labour, so these costs could be 
reviewed periodically. Price comparison across the supply chain 
is not relevant as processors take on the majority of risk. 
• Corporate growers have the resources to do a return-on- 
investment analysis before entering into a contract. Small 
growers may not have these resources. An ROI model template 
that could be used by prospective growers may be helpful. Such a 
model should include all the significant risk variables and the 
ability to vary each one. 
Information 
• Lack of information 
transparency – growers not 
able to verify market or 
information provided by 
supply chain 
• Index pricing based on data, collated 
and managed by independent body. 
• Government to publish pricing, for 
example, through ABARES or ABS. 
• Growers should know their costs of production; they don’t need 
to know the cost of production through the whole supply chain. 
What value would that add? 
Environmental 
• Getting to Net Zero 2050 – 
who and how will it impact? 
Who will pay for that impact? 
• Forward modelling for regions, 
similar to dairy farm monitoring 
project for the dairy industry. 
• This is a conversation that needs to be had, but in a different 
forum.

3 
Participants were briefed on, and then discussed the 2 project ideas that were developed by the 
chicken meat growers' group in a workshop held on 28 September 2021, and discussed by chicken 
meat processors at a workshop on 7 October 2021: 
1) Develop a Code of Conduct – The code would be based on risk apportionment and principles of 
fairness and acting in good faith. 
2) Benchmarking – Data sharing and benchmarking across the supply chain to address information 
asymmetries and build price indexes. 
Details of these project ideas are set out in the Chicken meat industry second workshop 
28 September 2021: Workshop communique. 
Code of conduct 
The corporate grower group questioned the relevance of a Code of Conduct to Recommendation 4 of 
the PAG inquiry but supported the idea of a voluntary code of conduct that was simple, addressed the 
pertinent issues and included the key items that contracts would need to cover, for example key 
common clauses. 
Pros 
A clear annual fee review process which recognizes unavoidable cost increases to Growers. 
Clear process to follow when a plant closure is considered. 
Clear pre-defined process regarding contract renewal. 
An agreed process of assigning contracts to new owners during the term of a contract which 
clarifies upgrade requirements during the term of the existing contract. 
Cons 
Shouldn’t become something that stifles commercial negotiations. 
The industry should not be supporting poor performers. 
Cannot have a one-size fits all for determining contract terms. 
Preference is for a voluntary code, if major processors sign up to it. However, a voluntary code 
would not be worthwhile if processors do not agree to sign up. 
There should be some oversight to help make sure the processors stick to the code. 
A code needs to be simple and not complicated, address the pertinent issues and have clear 
language that is understood by all parties. 
There should be obligations on growers as well. 
Processors and growers to agree what critical protections are needed in the code, for example: 
− 
Key common clauses that can be incorporated into contracts, rather than a definitive 
contract template. 
− 
Dispute mechanism boundaries and interpretation. 
Grant application to fund drafting and consultation of a voluntary code.

4 
Benchmarking 
The corporate growers did not support supply chain benchmarking. Growers, armed with a suitable 
model with confidential inputs, could benefit from opportunities to improve their efficiencies. This is 
not regarded as supply chain benchmarking and any data would be owned by growers and be 
confidential. 
Pros (return on investment) 
Most benefit would be derived if participation was national with data segmented by sector, 
geography and size. 
To be effective, it must have accurate information and from different types of growers. 
It should relate to just the on- farm costs and will enable growers to see where they could see 
efficiencies to their costs. 
Cons (benchmarking) 
Data should be confidential to the grower participants. 
Public transparency of costs in the supply chain, can lead to margin pressure throughout. This 
may impact both processor and grower, particularly with the use of value chain analysis 
techniques as seen oversees (UK). 
A return-on-investment model can provide data for someone contemplating entering the 
growers’ market. 
Should have a body to manage, must be independent and respected across industry. 
Suggestion that benchmarking/ROI model to be led by Australian Chicken Meat Federation as 
representative of both processors and growers. 
Next steps 
Corporate chicken meat growers provided useful insights to the projects previously proposed. 
Representatives from the chicken meat supply chain should continue to work together to explore the 
development of projects to address the opportunities presented over the four workshops.

5 
Appendix A: Participant list 
AAM (Investment Group) 
Fairglen Farms 
ProTen 
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission 
DAWE Agricultural Policy Division 
© Commonwealth of Australia 2021 
Commonwealth of Australia (referred to as the Commonwealth). 
All material in this publication is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Licence except content 
supplied by third parties, logos and the Commonwealth Coat of Arms. 
care and skill in preparing and compiling the information and data in this publication. Notwithstanding, the Department of 
Agriculture, Water and the Environment, its employees and advisers disclaim all liability, including liability for negligence 
and for any loss, damage, injury, expense or cost incurred by any person as a result of accessing, using or relying on any of 
the information or data in this publication to the maximum extent permitted by law.