1 
Improving market transparency in perishable agricultural goods 
industries 
Red meat industry second workshop 26 November 2021: 
Workshop communique 
Background 
In late 2020, the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) conducted an inquiry into 
bargaining power imbalances in supply chains for perishable agricultural goods (PAG) in Australia. 
The inquiry recommended that the government explore measures to increase price transparency in 
PAG industries to increase competition in those industries. 
Agriculture, Water and the Environment (DAWE) has committed $5.4 million to improve price and 
market transparency in PAG industries by: 
delivering co-design workshops with PAG industries to understand their market transparency 
issues, opportunities and requirements 
delivering a grants program to develop and implement tailored mechanisms to improve price and 
market transparency. 
The workshops provide an opportunity for participants to discuss price and market transparency 
issues in their sector, brainstorm ideas to improve transparency and co-design the details of solutions 
going forward. 
Workshop outcomes 
Twenty industry and government representatives attended the second red meat price and market 
transparency workshop (Appendix A). The workshop’s objective was to generate ideas for potential 
projects that could either form the basis of a proposal in the department’s upcoming grants program 
or be progressed outside of this program. 
Three opportunities were presented to participants by Meat and Livestock Australia (MLA). 
Participants then identified gaps, opportunities and key stakeholders for each: 
1) Digitising current market information collection and reporting 
2) New market indicators 
3) Amplifying market information and insights

2 
MLA presented each opportunity and asked participants for feedback on: 
gaps and opportunities to refine the scope of work 
the key stakeholders that would be involved in collaborating for developing proposals for grants 
funding. 
Table 1 provides an overview of the potential projects. 
Table 1 Potential projects 
Digitise current market information 
collection and reporting 
Technology-driven market reporting 
platform, streamlined to provide 
significantly greater efficiency, insights 
and value to stakeholders. 
A coordinated series of 4 interlinked 
initiatives: 
• Integrate MLA’s National Livestock 
Reporting Service data into a data 
platform – supports creation of a 
‘whole of life’ quality and value 
feedback loop. 
• Source livestock data externally – 
increased pool of data equals 
greater transparency. 
• Create a saleyard data capture 
solution – supports increased 
current and future operating 
models. 
• Transition to dynamic reporting – 
increased responsiveness and 
timely real-time access to 
reporting. 
Forward indicators are not currently 
reported. 
Rigid structure of metrics. 
Limited access to metrics outside 
saleyards. 
Agility in data sets and reporting 
• Evidence base grows over time 
• Integrate existing data points, 
including live animal exports data 
• Ability to integrate future data 
sources 
• Moving with technology – new 
platforms, moving data to the cloud. 
Iterate towards near time reporting with 
aim of real-time indicators. 
Automated reporting to include checks 
and balances, including standards to 
ensure consistency. 
New livestock accreditation standard. 
Use system intelligence to highlight 
outliers. 
Capture niche market data (for example, 
Wagyu). 
MLA are leading this 
work, with active 
contribution by the 
industry. 
• Agent industry 
New market indicators 
MLA to upgrade existing indicators, and 
develop new indicators, to ensure they 
are relevant and provide greater 
coverage of the various sales channels. 
A revised feeder steer indicator was 
implemented in May 2021, to extend the 
indicator to steers up to 600kg 
liveweight and increase the breadth of 
muscle and fat scores included in the 
indicator. 
Additional indicators planned: 
• Live Export Price Indicator – 
capturing live export from 
Northern Territory. Comprises 9% 
of the national herd and there are 
no indicators currently servicing 
the NT. 
• Online auctions indicators. 
No ability to select different data for 
indicators. 
Live animal exports data pull is quite 
narrow. 
Aggregated market indicator. 
Expand data inputs to exporters. 
Trial different specifications for industry. 
Extend to feedlots, processors and other 
participants in the supply as data source 
points. 
Use an anonymous reporting model 
MLA to lead this work, 
• Cattle Council of 
Australia 
• Sheep Producers 
Australia 

3 
Amplifying market information and 
insights 
MLA has a large collection of market 
information that is distributed across a 
number of channels, including 
mainstream media, newsletters, reports, 
briefs, printed publications, website and 
myMLA, stakeholder engagement, events 
and other stakeholder requests. 
MLA is in a unique position with timely 
and accurate market information 
available that media and industry rely 
on. A range of new activities and focus 
areas can enable MLA to leverage this 
position – most importantly, providing 
stakeholders with relevant market 
information. 
Future opportunities: 
• Bespoke social media channels and 
regular webinars. 
• Media round table discussions. 
• Video and audio ‘grabs’ – radio 
news release, podcast. 
• Media training and upskilling staff 
and other industry advocates. 
• Bespoke media partnerships. 
Not all non-saleyard sourced prices – such 
as Over The Hook Grids - are available. 
Noting that these are challenging to 
measure. 
Ability to configure portal. 
Additional scope to assist people make the 
best decisions. 
Channel for industry to make suggestions. 
MLA to lead this work 
Next steps 
We recommend that representatives from MLA continue to engage and collaborate with stakeholders 
across the red meat supply chain to develop respective proposals for grant funding.

4 
Appendix A: Participant list 
Australian Country Choice 
Cattle Council of Australia  
Elders 
KG2 
Live Export Council 
Meat and Livestock Australia  
Red Meat Advisory Council 
Sheep Producers Australia 
DAWE Agricultural Policy Division 
DAWE Agricultural Policy Division 
© Commonwealth of Australia 2021 
Commonwealth of Australia (referred to as the Commonwealth). 
All material in this publication is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Licence except content 
supplied by third parties, logos and the Commonwealth Coat of Arms. 
care and skill in preparing and compiling the information and data in this publication. Notwithstanding, the Department of 
Agriculture, Water and the Environment, its employees and advisers disclaim all liability, including liability for negligence 
and for any loss, damage, injury, expense or cost incurred by any person as a result of accessing, using or relying on any of 
the information or data in this publication to the maximum extent permitted by law.