1 
Improving market transparency in perishable agricultural goods 
Horticulture industry first workshop 12 October 2021: 
Workshop communique 
Background 
In late 2020, the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) conducted an inquiry into 
bargaining power imbalances in supply chains for perishable agricultural goods (PAG) in Australia. 
The inquiry recommended that the government explore measures to increase price transparency in 
PAG industries to increase competition in those industries. 
Agriculture, Water and the Environment (DAWE) has committed $5.4 million to improve price and 
market transparency in PAG industries by: 
delivering co-design workshops with PAG industries to understand their market transparency 
issues, opportunities and requirements 
delivering a grants program to develop and implement tailored mechanisms to improve price and 
market transparency. 
The workshops provide an opportunity for participants to discuss price and market transparency 
issues in their sector, brainstorm ideas to improve transparency and co-design the details of solutions 
going forward. 
Workshop outcomes 
Thirty-one industry and government representatives attended the first horticulture price and market 
transparency workshop (Appendix A). The objective of the first workshop was to discover and 
analyse the issues, barriers and opportunities to increase market and price transparency in the 
horticulture industry. 
Participants worked in small groups that explored: 
Issues – Negative characteristics within the horticulture industry that decrease price and market 
Barriers – Negative characteristics external to the horticulture industry that decrease price and 
market transparency. 
Internal opportunities – Positive characteristics that exist within the horticulture industry that 
can potentially increase price and market transparency. 
External opportunities – Positive characteristics outside the horticulture industry that can 
potentially increase price and market transparency.

2 
Throughout this process, issues and barriers (and consequently, opportunities) were categorised as 
either legislative, regulatory, industry specific, general process, technology driven, consumer driven 
informational or environmental. 
Table 1 identifies and categorises the key themes of issues, barriers and opportunities from the 
workshop discussions. 
Table 1 Issues, barriers and opportunities 
Legislative/ 
regulatory 
Horticulture Code of Conduct: 
• Definition of actors in sector 
• Contracts between suppliers and 
retailers 
• Role and status of the Food and 
Grocery Code. 
Enhance data provisions in code. 
Review use and application of contracts to 
improve issues around transparency. 
Introduction of a Fresh Produce 
Ombudsman to adjudicate over the code 
and pricing in the sector. 
Specific to horticulture 
industry 
Inherently complex industry with a range 
of specific issues, including: 
• Written contracts or verbal 
arrangements 
• Level of perishability 
• Diversified farm businesses, for 
example, red meat 
• Different interpretations of quality 
from buyers that change with supply 
and demand 
• Pooling and price averaging across 
different growers 
• Competition between growers, and a 
lack of understanding who is 
supplying what produce in any given 
timeframe 
• Competition with imported produce 
and knowing the timeframes of 
coming into the market 
• Variations between oversupply and 
undersupply – cyclical and seasonal 
• Need to better understand demand 
and fluctuations in the market. 
Horticulture industry is quite resilient 
Collaboration across the supply chain to 
meet supply and demand. 
Mapping the supply chain and price 
drivers/influences at each point. 
General to PAG 
No timely price signals to allow decision 
making. 
Not everyone in the supply chain values 
Labour supply – no visibility of available 
labour and exacerbated by pandemic. 
Larger growers get lucrative contracts and 
small growers get less experienced agents. 
Collaboration across the supply chain to 
meet supply and demand. 
Mapping the supply chain and price 
drivers/influences at each point.

3 
Technology driven 
Lagging technology in Australia – 
data/information – which impacts: 
• Access and adoption of technology 
across supply chain 
• Reliance on paper-based systems 
• Supply chain lacks digitisation 
• No mechanism to gather and publish 
meaningful information – accurate, 
timely, relevance, cost, price and 
volume 
• Disparate systems are used across 
the sector which are not compatible 
to one another 
• Lack of education on interpreting and 
understanding pricing and market 
data. 
Explore technology to capture, analyse and 
report accurate & timely data and educate 
the supply chain on how to use. This 
includes, but is not limited to: 
• Timely data on central platform 
• Improve current platforms with 
better technology 
• Transitioning from paper-based 
processes to digital 
Empowering people to make better 
decisions, by introducing: 
• Better analytics for existing data 
of data 
• Better use of tech to access data and 
info 
• Applying consumer data right to 
improve competition  
• Sharing data from central markets 
• Capacity and skill building to use data 
Information 
Information is fragmented making it 
difficult to interpret and understand the 
impact of real-time information, due to: 
• Different channels in the supply chain 
• Quantity of produce at any given time 
• Capturing variability in quality 
• Reporting mechanisms and data 
reliability. 
Investigate and document best practice 
and learnings from domestic and 
international PAG industries. 
Establish a feedback loop that makes it 
easier for growers to see what consumers 
want faster. 
Consumer/market 
driven 
Consumers demanding more information 
about products, including provenance and 
ethical sustainability. 
Growers are price-takers with retailers' 
loss-leading by price matching. Prices 
differ from day to day and there is little 
transparency on how they are set. 
Difficult to brand and apply IP to produce. 
Also, Country of Origin labelling on 
processed produce needs looking at. 
Mechanism to enhance traceability, 
including linking to price reporting. 
Improving marketing farmgate prices by 
exploiting new and emerging markets. 
Environmental 
Environmental factors have a significant 
impact on this industry, including: 
• The seasonal variation of produce 
• Level of perishability of produce 
• Ability to meet market leads to 
oversupply in a collaborative manner 
across the supply chain 
• Natural disasters and weather 
impacting viability of crops 
• Pandemic changing consumer buying 
behaviours – this can positive and 
negative. 
Improved information and data.

4 
Priority opportunities 
The opportunities identified by participants at the workshop will be prioritised via a survey to be 
distributed and finalised prior to the next workshop to establish the top priorities for further work. 
Next steps 
The outcomes of the first workshop provide the basis for developing potential solutions to improve 
price and market transparency in the red meat industry. Potential solutions will be co-designed by 
participants in Workshop 2 on 4 November 2021.

5 
Appendix A: Participant list 
ALDI 
Alfred E. Chave 
Apple and Pear Australia Ltd 
Australian Banana Growers Council 
Australian Macadamia Society 
Australian Nut Industry Council 
AusVeg 
Avocados Australia 
Berries Australia 
Fresh Markets Australia 
Australian Fresh Produce Alliance 
Fresh State Ltd 
Growcom 
Horticulture Innovation Australia 
Melons Australia 
National Farmers’ Federation Horticulture Council 
NSW Farmers Association 
Optomni 
Qualipac 
Summerfruits Australia 
Vegetables WA 
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission 
DAWE Agricultural Policy Division 
© Commonwealth of Australia 2021 
Commonwealth of Australia (referred to as the Commonwealth). 
All material in this publication is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Licence except content 
supplied by third parties, logos and the Commonwealth Coat of Arms. 
care and skill in preparing and compiling the information and data in this publication. Notwithstanding, the Department of 
Agriculture, Water and the Environment, its employees and advisers disclaim all liability, including liability for negligence 
and for any loss, damage, injury, expense or cost incurred by any person as a result of accessing, using or relying on any of 
the information or data in this publication to the maximum extent permitted by law.