1 
Improving market transparency in perishable agricultural goods 
industries 
Dairy industry second workshop 11 November 2021: 
Workshop communique 
Background 
In late 2020, the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) conducted an inquiry into 
bargaining power imbalances in supply chains for perishable agricultural goods (PAG) in Australia. 
The inquiry recommended that the government explore measures to increase price transparency in 
PAG industries to increase competition in those industries. 
Agriculture, Water and the Environment (DAWE) has committed $5.4 million to improve price and 
market transparency in PAG industries by: 
• 
delivering co-design workshops with PAG industries to understand their market transparency 
issues, opportunities and requirements 
• 
delivering a grants program to develop and implement tailored mechanisms to improve price and 
market transparency. 
The workshops provide an opportunity for participants to discuss price and market transparency 
issues in their sector, brainstorm ideas to improve transparency and co-design the details of solutions 
going forward. 
Workshop 2 outcomes 
Twenty industry and government representatives attended the second dairy price and market 
transparency workshop (Appendix A). The workshop’s objective was to generate ideas for potential 
projects that could either form the basis of a proposal in the department’s upcoming grants program, 
or be progressed outside of this program. 
Prior to breaking out into small groups, four organisations provided an overview of some projects 
underway within the industry: 
1) Dairy Australia gave a short overview of the Dairy Australia Business Calculator. 
2) Australian Dairy Farmers gave an overview of the traceability guidelines. 
3) Bridgecape Commodities gave a brief overview of the Australian Milk Price Index. 
4) Australian Dairy Products Federation gave a brief overview of the Milk Value Portal. 
5) Milk2Market provided a brief overview of the Milk Price Calculator.

2 
Participants self-selected to work in small groups on the following opportunities: 
1) Develop data framework for standardisation of definitions 
2) Digital tools – either new or optimise existing tools 
3) Education across the supply chain. 
The whole group then came together to consider each idea including purpose, details, stakeholders, 
risks and benefits, and next steps. Groups presented to each other to gather further input, look at next 
steps and prioritise which project should be progressed, for either application to grants funding 
during the first half of 2022, or for industry-led development. 
Table 1 provides an overview of the potential projects that could be amalgamated as one project. 
At the end of the workshop, participants were asked to select their preferred project to be progressed 
either by industry or through a future government grant funding round. Participants favoured 
amalgamating all three project ideas into one multi-faceted project, commencing with a framework 
for standardisation and enabling easier access to, and optimising existing tools as first phase, followed 
by an education campaign as a second phase. 
We recommend that representatives from across the dairy supply chain continue to engage and 
collaborate to scope out the requirements for each project phase and develop a proposal for grant 
funding for those elements of the project that cannot otherwise be undertaken with current industry 
resources.

3 
Table 1 Overview of potential projects 
Framework for 
standardisation 
Develop a policy framework or 
set of guidelines for 
standardisation and definitions. 
Guidelines will assist to 
benchmark product and obtain 
transparency by: 
• aligning standards and 
definitions across the 
supply chain 
• capturing information to 
upload to a tool. 
The guidelines for standards and 
definitions could be developed 
through a five-step process: 
1) Audit of existing projects 
that have sought to define 
standards and definitions 
2) Identify what data to 
capture 
3) Identify standards 
4) Map data to the standards 
5) Develop the model. 
Identify what data to capture: 
• Product 
• Location 
• Price 
• Category 
• Region 
• Season. 
Identify standards: 
• International standards 
• Ongoing work in Australia in other agricultural 
industries, such as the grains industry. 
Map data to standards: 
• Applicable across multiple areas 
• Familiarity with industry. 
Develop model: 
• Potential to build on traceability guidelines and 
work done by the National Farmers’ Federation 
and the Food Agilities CRC. 
Access to data in the absence of mandatory 
requirements – collaboration; ADF and ADPF 
involvement. 
Farmers’ confidence in the data – public auctions with 
standardised guidelines. 
Industry complexity – keep it simple, relevant, easy to 
use, clear and transparent. 
Breaking familiarity with what has already been done 
– desire for greater transparency and better risk 
management. 
The ADF and ADPF to host the model/data to 
provide representation from farmers and 
processors, for example, through ADIC. 
The following stakeholders can provide data: 
• Processors. 
Data may be available from existing sources: 
• Dairy Australia – reports 
• Lessons learned from overseas (for example, 
EU – although these markets are highly 
regulated). 
While there are skills that already exist within the 
industry, the following skillsets will need to be 
factored in and costed: 
• Expertise in data standards 
• Expertise in building digital tools – to ensure 
compatibility 
• Legal advice – data sharing and privacy 
• Project management. 
Conduct an inventory audit 
to see what already exists, 
and to ensure not 
duplicating work already 
underway. 
Dairy Australia and ADIC 
collaborate with farmers 
and processors to develop 
model. 
Grain Trade Australia may 
be able to assist due to their 
existing work on 
centralising market data.

4 
Optimise and enable digital 
access to existing tools 
Create a sustainable dairy 
industry through: 
• enabling the supply chain 
easier access to price and 
market information that 
informs decision making 
• attracting investment into 
the industry by 
demonstrating 
transparency. 
A webpage with an explanation and links to different 
tools: 
• Australian Milk Price Index 
• Milk Value Portal 
• Milk2Market milk price calculator 
• Dairy Australia farm business calculator 
• Australian Dairy Farmers traceability. 
Optimise each tool with a clear purpose: 
• Complete a gap analysis of each tool 
• Map out each tool in terms of what each one 
does, what it needs to do, end-user, synergies 
with other tools. 
Data security (obtain data security advice). 
Data provision – getting people on board (provide 
clarity around the end-purpose; better decision 
making across the industry). 
Defining what each pricing initiative is able to do 
(make sure it is simple enough for all participants to 
understand the purpose of each tool). 
Credibility of data (cross-checking and validation 
tools). 
A working group/expert panel would be convened 
to work on this project with: 
• The Australian Dairy Industry Sustainability 
Framework to assist with scoping work 
• The Australian Dairy Industry Council, as the 
overarching peak body, to provide 
overarching accountability for the project. 
The industry supply chain stakeholders that can 
contribute in some way through workshops or 
surveys are: 
• Farmers 
• Processors 
• Traders 
• Retailers 
• Consumers. 
The government as an independent body could 
potentially host the home page. 
Funding and resourcing (skills) will need to be 
costed for: 
• A desk audit/study of lessons learnt of 
previous and current tools 
• A survey of farmers and processors (and 
others) to better understand information 
requirements 
• Workshops to investigate optimising tools 
• Hosting and maintaining the home page 
• Project management resources (both in-
house and external suppliers) 
• Legal advice (potential) for optimising or 
informing about the tools 
• Data security advice (potential). 
Australian Dairy Farmers 
and Australian Dairy 
Products Federation to take 
lead on developing a 
proposal in 
collaboration/consultation 
with everyone who has a 
tool. 
It is important that 
stakeholders share 
information between 
projects to see alignment. 
Australian Dairy Industry 
Council to drive and oversee 
the project.

5 
Education program 
The primary purpose is the 
education of farmers – with 
scope to broaden to processers – 
in business fundamentals and to 
improve technology literacy. 
Given the communication 
preferences of dairy farmers, the 
education program would be 
primarily delivered face-to-face. 
The education campaign would 
support the framework for 
standardisation, and digital 
access and optimisation of tools 
projects. 
The scope of a training campaign would include: 
• Business fundamentals courses delivered face-
to-face, with complementary online courses 
• Technology literacy courses 
• Train the trainer opportunities 
• Developing a framework for groups to deliver 
• Creating a cooperative education channel. 
A survey would be required to determine a baseline 
of knowledge and education needs, and enable 
improvements to be measured over time. 
The training also provides an opportunity for 
networking and community sharing, noting that 85% 
of dairy farmers prefer face-to-face communication. 
Farmers commit to deliverables without 
understanding the implications. For example, margin 
management, supply challenges; messaging 
inconsistent (quality of and consistent messaging to 
farmers). 
Won’t capture everyone – lack of participation, 
especially with travel involved. Need to have online 
tools to compliment face-to-face training. 
Under-resource the project – need to scope carefully. 
Unable to conduct in-person training due to external 
factors, such as COVID-19 or natural disaster. Need to 
have online tools to compliment face-to-face training. 
Australian Dairy Farmers and Australian Dairy 
Products Federation to coordinate together to lead 
the campaign. 
Collaborate across the supply chain, including the 
following stakeholders in communicating, 
developing and/or delivering the training: 
• Dairy Australia 
• Consultants 
• Commonwealth and/or state governments 
• Cooperatives 
• Retailers 
• Primary audience – farmers 
• Secondary audience – processors. 
Funding and resourcing (skills) will need to be 
costed for: 
• Skills – training, online workshops, web 
build, trainer for workshops, train the trainer 
• Website to host online material 
• Development of a framework for a repeatable 
formula 
• Developing in-person and online learning 
modules 
• Financial advice. 
The education campaign would leverage existing 
programs to either build on or link to. 
The campaign could also use established networks, 
such as Dairy Australia’s survey. 
A working group to come 
together and be clear on 
what initiatives are to be 
included in the training 
package, including: 
• Scoping the detail of 
what is, or isn’t 
included in the package 
• Scope distribution of 
training through 
current networks. 
This would form phase 2 of 
a broader project.

6 
Appendix A: Participant organisation 
• 
ALDI 
• 
Ausfine 
• 
Australian Dairy Farmers 
• 
Australian Dairy Products Federation 
• 
Dairy Australia 
• 
GS1 Australia 
• 
Lactalis 
• 
Milk2Market 
• 
SA Markets 
• 
Australian Milk Price Initiative 
• 
Bridgecape Commodities 
• 
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission 
• 
DAWE Agricultural Policy Division 
© Commonwealth of Australia 2021 
Commonwealth of Australia (referred to as the Commonwealth). 
All material in this publication is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Licence except content 
supplied by third parties, logos and the Commonwealth Coat of Arms. 
care and skill in preparing and compiling the information and data in this publication. Notwithstanding, the Department of 
Agriculture, Water and the Environment, its employees and advisers disclaim all liability, including liability for negligence 
and for any loss, damage, injury, expense or cost incurred by any person as a result of accessing, using or relying on any of 
the information or data in this publication to the maximum extent permitted by law.