1 
Improving market transparency in perishable agricultural goods 
Dairy industry first workshop 21 October 2021: 
Workshop communique 
Background 
In late 2020, the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) conducted an inquiry into 
bargaining power imbalances in supply chains for perishable agricultural goods (PAG) in Australia. 
The inquiry recommended that the government explore measures to increase price transparency in 
PAG industries to increase competition in those industries. 
Agriculture, Water and the Environment (DAWE) has committed $5.4 million to improve price and 
market transparency in PAG industries by: 
delivering co-design workshops with PAG industries to understand their market transparency 
issues, opportunities and requirements 
delivering a grants program to develop and implement tailored mechanisms to improve price and 
market transparency. 
The workshops provide an opportunity for participants to discuss price and market transparency 
issues in their sector, brainstorm ideas to improve transparency and co-design the details of solutions 
going forward. 
Workshop outcomes 
Twenty industry and government representatives attended the first dairy price and market 
transparency workshop (Appendix A). The objective of the first workshop was to discover and 
analyse the issues, barriers, and opportunities to increase market and price transparency in the dairy 
Participants worked in small groups that explored: 
Issues – Negative characteristics within the dairy industry that decrease price and market 
transparency. 
Barriers – Negative characteristics external to the dairy industry that decrease price and market 
transparency. 
Internal opportunities – Positive characteristics that exist within the dairy industry that can 
potentially increase price and market transparency. 
External opportunities – Positive characteristics outside the dairy industry that can potentially 
increase price and market transparency.

2 
Throughout this process, issues and barriers (and consequently, opportunities) were categorised as 
either legislative, regulatory, industry specific, general process, technology driven, consumer driven 
informational or global driven. 
Table 1 identifies and categorises the key themes of issues, barriers and opportunities from the 
workshop discussions. 
Table 1 Issues, barriers and opportunities 
Legislative/ 
regulatory 
Dairy code is mandatory and grocery code is 
voluntary, which creates inequality across supply 
chain when interventions are applied. 
No access to real-time pricing and supply/demand 
data to enable business risk management. 
Lack of regulation (compared to overseas) limits 
ability to gather data that: 
• is timely 
• is related to points in the supply chain 
• provides visibility of stock supply and levels 
of supply and demand. 
Difficulties in providing price increases due to the 
restrictions around contract variations in the Dairy 
Code. 
Regulate the provision of data. 
Specific to dairy 
industry 
Full participation across the supply chain will 
enable fair and equitable price and market 
transparency. Little recognition of this 
demonstrated by a lack of trust across the supply 
chain. 
May not be realistic expectation of contractual 
arrangements and relationships across supply 
chain. 
Business fundamentals training is absent in this 
No resources to analyse or share data, also limits 
to some information availability (for example, 
commercial confidentiality). 
The complexity of the supply chain makes it 
difficult to compare products (for example, 
different pricing models, units of measurement, 
products). 
Other issues and barriers include: 
• No price benchmarking 
• No spot market in milk 
• No history of price discovery 
• Lack of liquidity in market 
• Loss of cooperatives. 
Education and a package for farmers 
around budgeting, revenue, farming for 
margin, how to trade contracts, and 
how the supply chain works. 
Explore optimising current tools, for 
example, Dairy Australia business 
calculators. 
Contribute to development of VIC 
Auction system/project as part of the 
AMPI initiative to develop risk 
management tools for milk price. 
Consider optimising the Milk Value 
Portal. 
standardisation, definitions. 
Evaluate/explore opportunities from 
offshore tools to assist with market 
assessments that can translate to 
Australian dairy industry. 
General to PAG 
Changes to the supply chain, for example, retailers 
purchasing directly from farmers and the retailer 
entering into the food services sector. 
Workforce shortages and capability across value 
chain.

3 
Technology 
driven 
Unable to access real-time pricing data and 
therefore unable to conduct realistic risk 
management. 
Some limitations with Milk Value Portal – not 
inclusive of all processor data – about 10% of 
processors not captured. 
Issues with digital systems, for example, timeliness 
of data. 
Educate industry on the importance of 
participating in the Milk Value Portal. 
Contribute to ADF work – blockchain/ 
standard form contracts. 
Digitalisation of current systems. 
Information 
Lack of knowledge/information of how prices are 
set across the supply chain – consumer awareness. 
standardisation, for example, 
definitions. 
Consumer/market 
driven 
Equalised pricing across products, for example, 
modified milk – farmgate milk prices vary across 
states. 
Consumers don’t understand pricing/prices. 
Environmental 
and global drivers 
Drought and regional variations impact supply and 
demand. 
Rising cost of imports drives contract renewal and 
negotiation terms, which impact the price and cost 
of goods. 
Import pricing is not reported. 
Summary of opportunities 
The opportunities identified by participants at the workshop were summarised as follows: 
1) Develop data framework for standardisation, and pricing information and definitions 
2) Improve risk management – including the development of milk price risk management tools like 
those seen in global markets 
3) Digital tools – develop or optimise 
4) Education across the supply chain 
Next steps 
The opportunities identified in the first workshop will be prioritised and will provide the basis for 
generating ideas for potential solutions to improve price and market transparency in the dairy 
industry. Ideas generation will be co-designed by participants in Workshop 2 on 11 November 2021.

4 
Appendix A: Participant organisation list 
ALDI 
Ausfine 
Australian Dairy Farmers 
Australian Dairy Products Federation 
Dairy Australia 
GS1 Australia 
Lactalis 
Milk2Market 
National Farmers’ Federation 
SA Markets 
Australian Milk Price Initiative 
Bridgecape Commodities 
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission 
DAWE Agricultural Policy Division 
© Commonwealth of Australia 2021 
Commonwealth of Australia (referred to as the Commonwealth). 
All material in this publication is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Licence except content 
supplied by third parties, logos and the Commonwealth Coat of Arms. 
care and skill in preparing and compiling the information and data in this publication. Notwithstanding, the Department of 
Agriculture, Water and the Environment, its employees and advisers disclaim all liability, including liability for negligence 
and for any loss, damage, injury, expense or cost incurred by any person as a result of accessing, using or relying on any of 
the information or data in this publication to the maximum extent permitted by law.