Lodged by electronic upload
https://haveyoursay.awe.gov.au/farm-management-deposits-scheme-evaluation/survey_tools/farm-
management-deposits-scheme-evaluation
30-4-2021
Submission to the Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment on the
review of the Farm Management Deposit Scheme
Introduction
Cotton Australia is the national peak body representing Australia 1400 cotton growers and ginners. In New
South Wales (NSW) our growers are located from the NSW/Victorian Border, to the NSW/Queensland
Border, primarily within the following river valleys – Murray, Murrumbidgee, Lachlan, Macquarie, Namoi,
Gwydir and Border Rivers.
In recent time we have also significant interest and investment targeted at expanding the Australian Cotton
Industry across Northern Australia, in Queensland, Northern Territory and Western Australia.
As an industry we strive to be Viable, Value and Advanced.
Cotton Australia is an active member of the National Farmers Federation (NFF), endorses it’s
comprehensive submission to this Review, and supports it’s recommendations. Consequently, this
submission will be very brief.
General Comments
Cotton Australia has reviewed the Terms of Reference and sought input from a cross-section of our
growers. The feedback we have received, both direct from growers and financial professionals has been
remarkably consistent with those articulate in the NFF submission.
Cotton Australia would like to make the point that the Farm Management Deposit Scheme is one of the
very few measures available to irrigators in term of any assistance to manage climate variability, and/or
drought.

Cotton Australia notes that the fact the total FMD balance has been growing, does not indicate lack of
genuine use of the scheme. Rather a review of balances over the past decade shows significant fluctuation
that demonstrate a pattern of both withdrawals and deposits, which is consistent with the participants
using the scheme in the way it was intended, and not as a deliberate tax mitigation tool.
Cotton Australia recommends the following actions (consistent with the NFF’s submission):
-
FMDS eligibility be explicitly extended to other business structures, such as trusts and partnerships;
-
limits on off-farm income be reviewed;
-
the FMDS allow the drawdown of FMD accounts over three years for unforeseen circumstances, such as death;
-
the cap on deposits be regularly reviewed every three years for its appropriateness given climate and market
conditions;
-
increased education and awareness on the benefits and implications of various drought measures, including
the FMDS; and
-
ensuring other government settings promote the use of FMDS, such as prudential regulations.
Conclusion
Cotton Australia looks forward to engaging further with the Federal Government on this review. For
further information on this brief submission, or to respond, please contact – Cotton Australia General
Manager, Michael Murray – 0427 707868 – Michaelm@cotton.org,au .
Submission ends