2006 Review of the 
Farm Management  
Deposits Scheme 
 
Executive Summary 
November 2006

Acknowledgements 
In carrying out this review, the Department has received assistance 
from the Australian Bureau of Agriculture and Resource Economics, 
the Centre for International Economics and key stakeholders during 
review consultations. Their assistance has been essential in 
assembling information to support the review’s findings. 
The contribution of the FMD Review Reference Committee has also 
been invaluable in the consideration of key issues, as well as to 
comment on review findings. 
Acronyms 
AAA 
 
Agriculture Advancing Australia 
ABA 
 
Australian Bankers’ Association 
ABARE  
Australian Bureau of Agriculture and Resource Economics 
ABS 
 
Australian Bureau of Statistics 
ADI 
 
Approved Deposit-taking Institution 
ANAO  
Australian National Audit Office 
ANZSIC 
Australia and New Zealand Standard Industrial Classification 
APRA  
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority 
ATO 
 
Australian Taxation Office 
CIE  
 
Centre for International Economics 
CPA 
 
Certified Public Accountants (Australia) 
.csv  
 
Comma Separated Value 
DAFF  
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry 
EC  
 
Exceptional Circumstances 
ECIRS  
Exceptional Circumstances Interest Rate Subsidy 
ECRP  
Exceptional Circumstances Relief Payment 
FMB 
 
Farm Management Bond 
 
FMD 
 
Farm Management Deposit  
IED 
 
Income Equalisation Deposit 
IRS  
 
Interest Rate Subsidy 
ITAA 
 
Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 
JCC 
 
Joint Consultative Committee 
KPI  
 
Key Performance Indicator  
 
MOU 
 
Memorandum of Understanding 
 
Appendices 
 
Report of FMD AAA Survey 
 
ABARE Economic Modelling Report 
 
Maps of FMD holdings and EC regions 
 
Consultation Report 
 
Extract from 2005 ABARE Farm Survey Report 
 
CIE Issues and Options Report  
 
State and industry graphs

2 
E X E C U T I V E S U M M A R Y 
 
 
F A R M M A N A G E M E N T D E P O S I T S 
 
 
Executive Summary 
1.1 Overview of FMD Scheme 
The Farm Management Deposits (FMD) Scheme was established in April 
1999 as a tax-linked, financial risk management tool for primary producers.  
The primary objective of the FMD Scheme is to assist primary producers 
deal more effectively with fluctuations in their cash flow resulting from 
climate variations and changes in market prices.  
At 30 June 2006 more than 42,000 primary producers held a total of $2.797 
billion in the FMD Scheme.  Although there was growth in the value of 
holdings by $4.3 million (0.2 per cent) in 2005-06, there has been a net 
decline in holdings in all states, with the exception of Queensland and a net 
decline in the number of holders by 1,197 (2.7 per cent). This coincides with 
persistent poor seasonal conditions across Australia.  FMD holdings 
represent a significant reserve of liquid assets which are able to be drawn 
upon in low income years, such as drought. 
The FMD Scheme is an element of the Agriculture Advancing Australia 
(AAA) package, an integrated policy package developed to encourage 
farmers to adopt a more self-reliant approach to risk management.  The 
Scheme allows eligible primary producers to set aside pre-tax primary 
production income in profitable years to establish cash reserves to help 
meet costs in low-income years, facilitating increased financial self-reliance. 
FMDs are only available to individual primary producers.  To be eligible to 
invest in an FMD, individual primary producers must not earn more than 
$50,000 off farm income in the year of deposit.  In addition, only primary 
production income can be invested in FMDs, up to a maximum holding of 
$300,000 at any given time.  Deposits are tax deductible in the year they are 
made, and included as taxable income in the year they are withdrawn.  To 
qualify for the tax deduction, deposits must remain in the account for at 
least 12 months, unless the withdrawal is made in Exceptional 
Circumstances (EC), and the deposit was made prior to the area being EC 
declared.

0 E X E C U T I V E S U M M A R Y
3
 
F A R M M A N A G E M E N T D E P O S I T S 
 
 
An initial review of the FMD Scheme was undertaken in 2002.  Broadly, the 
review found that the Scheme was meeting its objectives as an effective 
way in which primary producers could set aside income to address future 
adverse financial circumstances.  As the Scheme was still in a build-up 
phase, it was thought to be too early to ascertain the full economic impact 
of FMDs.  The review considered that the effectiveness of the Scheme could 
be better assessed when there is a rural downturn, after the Scheme had 
attained a greater level of maturity. 
 
This is the second evaluation of the FMD Scheme to be undertaken since 
the commencement of the Scheme, and was undertaken concurrently with 
a wider evaluation of the AAA suite of programmes which are due to 
conclude in 2008.  The review reports on the effectiveness and efficiency of: 
 
 
the FMD Scheme in meeting its policy objectives as a tax-linked, 
financial risk management tool for primary producers; and 
 
 
the Scheme’s administration and legislative framework. 
 
 
1.2 Key Findings & 
Recommendations 
Policy Effectiveness 
The 2006 review did not examine the policy appropriateness of the FMDs 
as a policy instrument. The first triennial review of the Scheme in 2002 
considered the policy rationale appropriate and consistent with the 
government’s aim of encouraging primary producers to become more 
innovative and financially self-reliant. Furthermore, the extent to which the 
Scheme is currently operating effectively and efficiently provides evidence 
on the validity of the rationale of the programme. 
Research and data drawn upon in the review, provide indicators of 
potential effectiveness and efficiency.  Key findings of the 2006 FMD 
Review indicate the Scheme is, prima facia, meeting its objectives as a tax-
linked, financial risk management tool for primary producers.  With more 
than 42,000 primary producers holding a total of $2.797 billion in FMDs at 
30 June 2006, farmers perceive they receive considerable benefits through 
participation in the Scheme.

4 
E X E C U T I V E S U M M A R Y 
 
 
F A R M M A N A G E M E N T D E P O S I T S 
 
The majority of farmers view FMDs as an important aspect of their overall 
risk management strategies, and most farmers holding FMDs have made 
withdrawals from their accounts since the Scheme’s inception. A high 
proportion of actual withdrawals have been used for working capital and 
there is evidence some deposits and withdrawals may reflect the industry 
and regional incidence of drought severity throughout Australia. 
Moreover, the total value of FMD holdings represents a significant reserve 
of liquid assets which are able to be drawn upon in low income years in the 
future to manage climatic variations and/or market fluctuations. 
Given the unfavourable seasonal conditions in recent years, many farmers 
have accumulated debt and may be approaching equity levels which will 
limit their ability to borrow further. If they have invested in FMD’s these 
will be available to sustain liquidity. 
 
The 2006 FMD Review has identified six main reasons why farmers invest 
in FMDs:  
 
 
obtain a commercial option to make better timed expenditure 
decisions. 
 
earn interest on otherwise taxed income; 
 
pay a lower eventual tax rate in situations where there is an expectation 
that tax rates will be lowered in the future; 
 
can leverage up the effects of EC interest rate subsidies; 
 
obtain flexibility in superannuation planning; and/or 
 
may mistakenly overestimate the benefits of the Scheme in relation to 
available alternative investment options, due to the complex nature of 
incentives they create.  
The review found that FMD holders who are using tax averaging are likely 
to receive low or negative nominal returns from investing in the FMD 
Scheme in response to five of the motivations listed above. However, 
investing in response to the first motivation could deliver important 
benefits to farmers and the wider economy with associated risk 
management benefits.  By placing funds in an FMD, farmers take out an 
option to later find a tax deduction to offset quarantined income.   
Evidence to support the suggestion that farmers are using FMDs to buy a 
commercial option, is based on the finding that tax management triggers 
the majority of FMD deposits, and most withdrawals are used for working 
capital which would most likely cover deductible expenses.  In addition, 
there is a distinct annual pattern of large net FMD deposits in June, and net 
withdrawals in July, which may suggest that farmers are using FMDs 
primarily as tax planning instruments.  However, use of FMDs to obtain a

0 E X E C U T I V E S U M M A R Y
5
 
F A R M M A N A G E M E N T D E P O S I T S 
 
 
commercial option for better and more timely resource allocation decisions, 
is likely to result in economic gains to farmers and to the economy and is 
consistent with good risk management practice.   
Rather than a driver of Scheme use, the pattern of FMD deposit and 
withdrawal transactions may be a consequence of the tax-based nature of 
the Scheme, with deposits made in late June when the taxation and 
financial position of the farmer is known, and funds withdrawn at the first 
available opportunity, being 12 months later in June or July.  By providing 
a tax based instrument that increases farmers’ commercial options through 
income smoothing and liquidity management, the FMD Scheme has been 
used for risk management purposes. Used in this way, FMDs promote 
better and timelier resource allocation decisions. For instance fertiliser is 
more likely to be applied when best needed rather than simply in the year 
high income is earned. Better farm management decisions are entirely 
consistent with better risk management decisions. Timely investments  
make the farm more financially viable and sustainable to cope with 
downturns due to climate variations or market fluctuations when they 
occur. Simply put, there is less risk that a farm will fail financially if poorly 
timed expenditure can be avoided. Without FMDs, poorly timed 
expenditure may be forced on farmers as they hurriedly seek to obtain off-
setting tax deductions before the end of a high-income financial year. 
Poorly timed expenditure leads to sub-optimal productivity and leaves 
farmers more financially vulnerable than they need be.  
In financial markets options are important risk management instruments. 
They increase choice and flexibility and so help spread and reduce financial 
risk. Similarly, an instrument such as FMDs that increases farmers’ 
financial options, potentially gives them more choices and so helps reduce 
risk. FMDs form part of a portfolio of risk management instruments in a 
farmer’s risk management strategy. The greater the number of instruments, 
the more robust the risk strategy is likely to be. 
Widespread drought conditions have been experienced throughout 
Australia since 2002-03. During this period, FMD holdings have continued 
to rise, with deposits broadly matching withdrawals. The aggregate trend 
of increasing/steady deposits through ongoing drought conditions may be 
masking the industry and regional incidence of drought severity. While the 
current review has been conducted following a prolonged period of 
drought conditions, many areas of Australia continue to experience below 
average rainfall conditions and have therefore not entered the recovery 
phase of the drought cycle. It is possible that farmers have made FMD 
deposits during the drought from the proceeds of the forced sale of 
livestock, and these deposits may not be withdrawn until the drought has

6 
E X E C U T I V E S U M M A R Y 
 
 
F A R M M A N A G E M E N T D E P O S I T S 
 
broken and restocking can begin.  As a result, further analysis of the 
Scheme’s operation after climatic conditions improve would assist in 
evaluating the role of FMDs in facilitating the return to profitability of farm 
businesses through the drawing down of available FMD reserves to replant 
and/or restock and to determine the effectiveness of the Scheme as a risk 
management tool for drought preparedness. This analysis would be used to 
inform the next full review of the Scheme in the 2009-10 financial year. 
Recommendation: The FMD Scheme be retained with its primary 
objective as a tax-linked, financial risk management tool for primary 
producers. 
Further analysis of the Scheme’s operation should be undertaken after 
climatic conditions improve. 
Evidence gathered during the current review indicates that farmers are 
using FMDs for a variety of reasons including flexibility in retirement 
planning. While positive economic gains may arise from such a use, 
farmers are likely to require both risk management reserves and retirement 
savings. In consultations, stakeholders proposed that FMDs be permitted to 
be rolled over into superannuation without a tax impost, however to do so 
would greatly extend the purpose and use of the Scheme from that of risk 
management of primary production. In addition, changes announced in the 
2006-07 Budget to superannuation laws are likely to reduce the taxation 
costs of transferring FMDs to superannuation in the near future, providing 
an increased incentive for farmers to transfer assets currently held in the 
farm business to superannuation accounts. 
Recommendation: FMDs should not be allowed to be rolled over into 
superannuation. 
Policy Efficiency 
Treasury has estimated the cost of the Scheme to the Commonwealth 
revenue at a total of $905 million for the years 2000-01 to 2004-05, with a 
projected cost of $110 million for the 2005-06 year. Scheme efficiency in 
relation to these costs may be calculated based on the economic gains that 
arise from farmers’ investment in FMDs that lead to better and more timely 
resource allocation decisions. 
While no comprehensive economic evaluation of the benefits and costs of 
the FMD Scheme was available at the time of the current review, positive 
economic gains and associated risk management benefits are likely to arise 
when FMDs are used to obtain an option, for flexibility in retirement

0 E X E C U T I V E S U M M A R Y
7
 
F A R M M A N A G E M E N T D E P O S I T S 
 
 
planning and by paying a lower eventual tax rate for those not using 
income averaging.  Other uses of FMDs run the risk of creating economic 
losses if they represent inferior investment decisions and the high 
opportunity costs of investing in assets providing low after tax returns.  
The high proportion of actual withdrawals that have been used for working 
capital and the high proportion of future withdrawals expected to be used 
for retirement or superannuation, suggests that FMDs are predominantly 
used for reasons that could result in economic gains and a positive overall 
efficiency outcome. 
 
Target Market 
That over 40,000 primary producers currently hold, on average, some 
$60,000 of FMDs suggests that the Scheme is very popular among farmers.  
ABARE survey findings indicate higher income, higher valued farms have 
a greater tendency to use the Scheme. This may suggest the Scheme does 
not tightly reach its defined target market of middle income farmers. 
However, the Scheme is being used by a substantial number of farmers in 
all areas of agriculture and by a variety of farmers. Of those using it, over 
50 per cent appear to be middle-income farmers. But there is no identifiable 
single group or even set of groups that can logically or economically be 
identified as the main users. This suggests that the Scheme is not unduly 
favouring one group or discriminating against another.  
Use of the Scheme during recent drought 
The current drought, which began in 2002–03, was preceded by two years 
of generally favourable seasonal conditions for the Australian farm sector.  
Correspondingly, there was strong growth in the number and value of 
holdings in the FMD Scheme from its inception until June 2002.  By far the 
most significant uptake in the Scheme occurred in the June 2002 quarter, 
when holdings nationwide rose 92 per cent from $1.1 billion to $2.1 billion, 
and the number of holders increased 80 per cent from 24,200 to 43,400.   
Drought has been a widespread feature of much of Australia’s landscape 
during the last three or four years, and may explain much of the increased 
churning of both deposits and withdrawals of FMDs that has occurred 
since 2003-04.  Since the onset of drought in 2002, FMD holdings have 
continued to increase steadily on an annual basis to a total of $2.797 billion 
at 30 June 2006.  Over the same period, the number of primary producers 
with FMDs has declined slightly to 42,365. 
The aggregate trend of increasing/steady deposits through ongoing 
drought conditions may be masking the industry and regional incidence of

8 
E X E C U T I V E S U M M A R Y 
 
 
F A R M M A N A G E M E N T D E P O S I T S 
 
drought severity, and its impact on FMD withdrawal and deposit 
behaviour.  66 per cent of farmers who have held FMDs have now made 
withdrawals from their accounts.  Industries in which the proportion of 
farmers who have made a withdrawal is larger than the national average 
are cropping, cotton, sheep and mixed crops and livestock.  New South 
Wales had by far the largest withdrawal rate of all the states, reflecting 
drought conditions. Although the total value of deposits had continued to 
rise between 2002 and 2005, total holdings in NSW have actually declined. 
In Western Australia where drought conditions have varied and have been 
less severe by comparison, deposits have grown strongly over the same 
period.  However persistent poor seasonal conditions across Australia have 
resulted in all states, with the exception of Queensland, experiencing a net 
decline in holdings during 2005-06. 
Use of the FMD Scheme in recent years might also have been affected by 
the operation of Exceptional Circumstances (EC) declarations designed to 
assist farmers in a region or industry experiencing a severe downturn due 
to a rare and severe climatic or other event.  When a declaration is made, 
assistance is available to eligible primary producers in the form of interest 
rate subsidies and income support in the form of the EC Relief Payment. 
The Terms of Reference for the 2006 FMD Review requires the review to 
examine the interaction of the FMD Scheme with other Australian 
Government policy measures. 
ABARE modelling results suggest that interest rate subsidies under the EC 
programme may make it advantageous for farms in EC declared areas to 
borrow money to put into FMDs. Interest rate costs of borrowing could be 
more than halved under the EC programme while the interest premium on 
an FMD could be nearly 50 per cent, allowing an opportunity to leverage 
up on subsidised borrowed funds.  However, there is some empirical 
evidence that use of the Scheme for leveraging-up the benefits of EC 
interest rate subsidies is not significant.  
Eligibility to receive an EC interest rate subsidy, EC Relief Payment, and 
income support under the Farm Help programme is subject to an off-farm 
assets test. Proceeds from the forced sale of livestock are not taken into 
account in the assessment of eligibility for these payments when they are 
placed in a term deposit of at least 3 months, including an FMD.   However, 
FMDs are generally not considered off-farm assets for this purpose.  
Given the intention of FMDs as a tool to facilitate the accumulation of 
liquid reserves to be used during a downturn in income, it has been 
suggested that FMDs be removed as an “exempt farm asset” in the

0 E X E C U T I V E S U M M A R Y
9
 
F A R M M A N A G E M E N T D E P O S I T S 
 
 
application of the assets test for EC business support (2006 Corish; 2006 
CIE).  
While the treatment of FMDs under related programmes potentially 
impacts on the effectiveness of the FMD Scheme in encouraging primary 
producer self-reliance, the issue of programme interaction needs to be 
addressed through the administration of related DAFF programmes, rather 
than the FMD Scheme. 
Recommendation: The issue of FMDs being treated as “exempt assets” in 
determining eligibility for related DAFF programmes should be 
reconsidered. 
Scheme Terms and Conditions 
Restrictions on eligibility and use of the Scheme make it simple to operate, 
audit and enforce. However, restrictions may also inhibit the Scheme’s 
effectiveness and diminish the commercial option values that FMDs 
embody in the facilitation of improved risk management, farm business 
growth, inter-generational success, ownership structures and overall 
efficiency of resource use. Notwithstanding this, Scheme criteria and 
thresholds are important integrity measures to encourage the risk 
management objectives of the Scheme. 
The FMD holding limit of $300,000 per individual has not been altered 
since the inception of the scheme in 1999.  However, the distribution of 
FMD holdings has changed over time, with funds accumulating in smaller 
numbers of larger deposits.  At June 2000, 8.6 per cent of total FMD funds 
were held in deposits between $250,000 and $300,000 in size, compared 
with more than double that amount (20.8%) at June 2006.  Different 
industries and regions have different risk management needs that FMDs 
serve, and the Scheme is likely to be self-limiting when the benefits from 
implementing commercial options funded from FMD withdrawals exceed 
the interest payment and tax deferral benefits from retaining those FMDs.  
The review acknowledges the increasing scale of farm businesses and thus 
the increased cost of production. To remain effective into the future, 
thresholds should take account of farm sector trends and the parallel need 
for larger risk management reserves to operate larger scale farm businesses. 
Recommendation : Consideration be given to raising the $300,000 deposit 
threshold to $365,000 to restore its real value, however given that 
different industries and regions have different risk management needs

10 
E X E C U T I V E S U M M A R Y 
 
 
F A R M M A N A G E M E N T D E P O S I T S 
 
that FMDs serve and considering the increasing scale of farm businesses 
there may be scope to further increase the threshold. 
Off-farm income can be a strategic component of a risk management 
portfolio for farmers, particularly during downturns such as drought 
where a farm business may rely on off-farm income from wages to meet 
household living expenses and family educational needs. In some cases off-
farm income from wages in certain professional occupations may exceed 
$50,000; 46% of farm businesses who hold FMDs rely on off-farm income to 
manage risk. There is evidence to suggest that in the small and medium to 
large sized farms and income groups, spousal income from off-farm wages 
exceeds the $50,000 off-farm income limit. This effectively rules out one 
member of a farm business partnership from holding FMDs. 
The $50,000 off-farm limit has not been increased since the Scheme’s 
inception.  The potential abuse of the Scheme by those who earn large off-
farm incomes would be addressed by retention of the limit of tax 
deductibility to primary production income. 
Recommendation: Consideration be given to increasing the off-farm 
limit per individual taxpayer to $65,000 to restore its real value, however 
the review acknowledges the importance of off farm income to manage 
risk, particularly in downturns such as drought and there may be scope 
to increase the limit further. 
In the case of couples, the review recommends consideration be given to 
a $130,000 combined off-farm income limit per spousal couple.  
Extending FMDs to companies could improve their management of risks 
and improve the efficiency of their resource use generally. The inability of 
companies to acquire FMDs also excludes any businesses that incorporate 
to benefit from the Commonwealth corporations powers from using the 
Scheme in their risk management strategies.  
Although company profits are taxed at a fixed rate and extending FMDs to 
them would not result in any tax equity benefits, to extend access of FMDs 
to companies would promote their option value use among larger business 
operations and remove some distortions in the use of FMDs by individual 
primary producers as they approach retirement age. However, further 
investigation of allowing companies to access the Scheme would need to be 
undertaken to consider the complexity of tax law amendment this access 
would require and the subsequent cost to revenue.  
Unlike companies, a trust is not a business structure for managing how 
resources are used to generate profits but rather a device for protecting

0 E X E C U T I V E S U M M A R Y
11
 
F A R M M A N A G E M E N T D E P O S I T S 
 
 
assets and distributing income to its members for tax management 
purposes.  Extending access of FMDs to trusts is unlikely to improve the 
operational effectiveness of FMDs, and could lead to abuse of the Scheme. 
As a company can be a beneficiary of a trust, to allow companies to own 
FMDs while preventing trusts from owning them could create an incentive 
to use a company as a beneficiary of a trust so that tax could be deferred. 
However, limiting the maximum holding threshold would contain the 
potential for trusts using a company as a beneficiary to indefinitely defer 
tax. Maximum deposits within a year are also limited to primary 
production income.  
Recommendation: Consideration be given to the extension of access of 
FMDs to companies, however further investigation on the feasibility and 
cost of extending access of FMDs to companies will need to be 
undertaken.    
Recommendation: Access to the Scheme should not be extended to trusts. 
Sources of farm risks, especially those arising from drought and market 
downturn, have consequences in rural areas that extend well beyond 
farmers. While a case can be made to extend FMDs to other rural 
businesses, to do so would require a large number of arbitrary boundaries 
that would greatly complicate the administrative simplicity of the existing 
Scheme and add to its compliance and enforcement costs. To extend the 
Scheme to producers of non-primary production activities is not likely to 
improve the effectiveness of the Scheme in achieving its objectives. 
Recommendation: FMDs should not be extended to non-primary 
production rural businesses. 
Currently FMDs must be repaid upon the death of a holder or him/her 
becoming bankrupt or ceasing to be a primary producer for at least 120 
days.  These requirements exist to encourage use of the Scheme for longer 
term risk management, rather than tax management alone, consistent with 
the Scheme’s objectives. 
Recommendation: The mandatory repayment requirements upon the 
death of a holder, becoming bankrupt or ceasing to be a primary 
producer for at least 120 days be maintained. 
Administration, Reporting and Communication 
Participation in and awareness of the Scheme are high, however research 
and data examined during the review indicates there is a complex mix of

12 
E X E C U T I V E S U M M A R Y 
 
 
F A R M M A N A G E M E N T D E P O S I T S 
 
incentives to hold FMDs. This may lead to some misunderstandings over 
the costs and benefits of FMDs and the Scheme’s intent as a longer term 
risk management instrument. 
Recommendation: Consideration be given to a targeted information and 
communication campaign with key influencers of the Scheme.  
Enhancements following the 2002 FMD Review and 2003 ANAO 
performance audit have strengthened the administrative effectiveness and 
monitoring and evaluation of the Scheme, however, further strengthening 
of key performance indicators would assist in determining whether the 
Scheme is being used as intended and is meeting its risk management 
objectives. 
Recommendation: Key performance indicators for the Scheme should be 
reviewed and strengthened. 
New reporting requirements for Approved Deposit-Taking Institutions 
(ADIs) were implemented in 2005-06 to improve the accuracy and 
timeliness of reporting and enable a more effective evaluation of Scheme 
use. While these were agreed and implemented with the ADIs, it may be 
necessary to amend current legislation for FMDs to reflect the changed 
requirements. 
Recommendation: Consideration be given to whether current legislation 
for FMDs requires amendment to reflect the new reporting requirements 
for ADIs. 
While the requirement to hold FMDs with one ADI is administratively 
efficient and allows easier tracking of individual holdings, it may place a 
restriction on competition that in any National Competition Policy review 
would need to be removed unless it was demonstrated that its benefits 
exceeded its costs.  
Recommendation: The requirement that all FMDs of an individual must 
be held with one financial institution should be reviewed.