SUBMISSION IN 
RESPONSE TO THE 
EVALUATION OF THE 
FARM MANAGEMENT 
DEPOSITS (FMD) SCHEME 
PREPARED BY GRAIN GROWERS LTD 
APRIL 2021

GrainGrowers | Submission in response to the Evaluation of the Farm Management Deposits (FMD) Scheme | April 2021 
2 
Australian farmers operate in one of the most risky environments in the world. 
They have to cope with numerous sources of risk including weather uncertainty, 
variable market process, and institutional changes in their business 
managements1.  
The Australian grains industry is a fiercely competitive industry with grain farming businesses exposed to 
global markets and not heavily subsided unlike its international competitors2.  
 
Australian grain farming enterprises are:  
• 
Operating in volatile environment impacted by both production and market risk.  
• 
Often capital intensive, low margin operations, that are faced by either low profitability or high-
income variability across years.  
• 
By-and-large family-owned operations that are increasingly requiring greater scale to ensure 
ongoing viability. 
 
To continue to be effective and globally competitive grain producers, the risk management measures 
need to be suitable along with ensuring regulation does not impeded upon the self-reliance of farming 
businesses. GrainGrowers believes it is critical to ensure that taxation measures are fit-for-purpose and 
effective as they have a significant impact on the competitiveness of our farming sector. It is imperative 
that the policy settings are right to ensure the grains industry remains internationally competitive.  
 
There are a range of taxation measures on hand to assist farming businesses in managing climate and 
market volatility. One of which is the Farm Management Deposits Scheme (FMDs or the Scheme), along 
with income averaging which seeks to smooth out the income of farming business whilst also providing 
opportunities to self-manage risk, especially in times of drought.  
 
GrainGrowers believes that Farm Management Deposit Scheme is one of a suite of measures that 
growers should have access to for managing the risks associated with climate change and market 
fluctuations. GrainGrowers believes that FMDs are an effective tool that require some adjustments to 
ensure they reflect the realities of modern farming practices and business structure. GrainGrowers’ 
recognises that the Scheme is a tool to improve resilience of farming businesses, however good 
planning and access to expert advice is also key. 
 
This submission makes comment on the following: 
• 
The Australian grain farming enterprise operating environment.  
• 
Use of Farm Management Deposits in the grain’s context. 
• 
Recommendations for improvement.  
 
1 Charles Stuart University (2004), Risk management strategies by Australian farmers via 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/227365292_Risk_management_strategies_by_Australian_farmers_two_case_studies  
2 GrainGrowers & AFI Briefing Paper: Transparency in trade and farmer support via https://www.graingrowers.com.au/wp-content/uploads/AFI-
briefing-paper-Australian-Farm-subsidies-May-2020.pdf 
[Front Cover Image: Approaching storm – Peter Herrick] 
EXECUTIVE 
SUMMARY

GrainGrowers | Submission in response to the Evaluation of the Farm Management Deposits (FMD) Scheme | April 2021 
3 
The effectiveness of the Farm Management Deposit Scheme should be based on delivering the intent rather that 
subscribers to the Scheme. Growers view FMDs as an effective tool to manage their risk and should be accessed 
when appropriate to them and their business. Utilisation of FMDs should be viewed in context of the stage a 
business is at and the broader operating environment. For example, a new farming business, experiencing their 
first drought may interact differently with the Scheme, compared to a farming enterprise who has been in operation 
for many years and has recently had a run of good seasons. 
Recommendation 1 – Access to Companies and 
Trusts  
Farm Management Deposits should be made available to all farming business (i.e. partnerships, 
companies and trusts) to improve uptake and effectiveness as a risk management tool. 
Recommendation 2 – Aligning taxation provisions  
Farm Management Deposits to be brought in line with taxation rules regarding the treatment of a 
taxpayer when they pass away. 
Recommendation 3 – Individual holdings  
The Australian Government undertake a review of the Farm Management Deposit holding 
threshold cap with full engagement and consultation with industry. The review of the cap should 
be included in the scope of the ongoing evaluation process undertaken by the Department of 
Agriculture, Water and Environment.   
Recommendation 4 – ‘Non-primary producer’ 
definition  
The ‘non-primary production’ income eligibility to be reviewed and consideration be made to 
ensure it reflects modern business practices.  
Recommendation 5 – Reporting and evaluation  
The Australian Government to review and strengthen key performance indicators for the Scheme 
and expand consideration of success beyond uptake of Scheme by farm businesses. 
 
SUMMARY OF 
RECOMMENDATIONS

GrainGrowers | Submission in response to the Evaluation of the Farm Management Deposits (FMD) Scheme | April 2021 
4 
The grains sector is a powerhouse of regional Australia with 23,000 farm businesses growing on average 
43.6 million tonnes of grains, oilseeds and pulses each year for domestic and global customers. The farm-gate 
value of Australian grain production is $15 billion, contributing 21% of the value of Australian agriculture. We are a 
major contributor to the Australian economy, directly employing over 100,000 people.  
The Australian agricultural sector is striving to reach $100 billion farmgate value by 2030, up from current value of 
$61 billion with the broader agribusiness supply chain striving to reach $300 billion. A significant increase in the 
value of farm production in a decade is clearly a challenging task. However, the Australian grain industry has a 
history of transformational change, underpinned by research and development and innovative farm businesses.  
 
Grains are produced in all Australian states and territories. Australia’s total winter crop area is around 21.5 million 
hectares each year, with summer crop area around 1.1 million hectares. By land area, nearly 40% of winter crop is 
concentrated in Western Australia, followed by 25% in New South Wales. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Australian grain industry is export focused with approximately 70% of total production sold to overseas 
customers in normal (non-drought) years. When looking at global trends the grains industry is seeing the rise in 
developing nation’s populations and increasing incomes seeing growth in consumption for western food products 
such as breads along with demand for animal protein. Both these trends result in opportunities for Australian grains 
be they for providing food quality wheat or a feed source for animal production systems.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. SNAPSHOT OF AUSTRALIAN 
GRAINS INDUSTRY  
Figure 2 Winter crop area by state.  
Source: ABARES 
Figure 1 Australian grain production regions 
Source: AEGIC  
Figure 3: Australian grain production and trade 
Source: ABARES

GrainGrowers | Submission in response to the Evaluation of the Farm Management Deposits (FMD) Scheme | April 2021 
5 
Agricultural Volatility and Risk  
Agriculture is and continues to be an industry that operates 
in a highly volatile operating environment. Risk comes in 
two forms, the first being that of production risk being that 
associated with the generation of an actual crop and the 
second risk comes from market price fluctuations. 
The impact of drought can be observed differently between 
regions and enterprise type and structure. Cropping farms 
generally face greater climate risk than beef farms, while 
mixed-cropping livestock farms sit in-between these 
extremes. There are trade-offs, cropping farms face higher 
risk but also generate higher returns. Cropping farms 
experience a decrease in profit from around $230,000 in a 
‘typical year’ down to a loss of $125,000 in a ‘dry year’3. 
Compared to a typical beef operation, profit falls from 
$60,000 in a ‘typical year’ down to a loss of $5,000 in a ‘dry 
year’3.  
The overall financial situation for broadacre remains positive despite many grain farms experiencing the worst 
drought in many years. In 2019-20 there were very poor outcomes of broadacre farms in NSW, relative to the 
longer-term average. In other states financial performance varied widely by region relative to longer-term average. 
With a change in seasonal conditions 2020-21 is expected to deliver higher incomes. The figures below 
demonstrate the change incomes prior to a change in season conditions and then what can result when 
widespread rainfall occurs.  
 
Figure 5 Farm cash income, broadacre farms 2019-20 
Source: ABARES Agricultural & Grazing Industries Survey  
 
3 ABARES (2019), The effects of drought and climate variability on Australian farms, accessed via 
https://www.agriculture.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/EffectsOfDroughtAndClimateVariabilityOnAustralianFarms_v1.0.0.pdf  
3. GRAINS  
OPERATING ENVIRONMENT  
Figure 6 Farm cash income, broadacre farms 2020-21  
Source: ABARES Agricultural & Grazing Industries Survey 
Preliminary estimate  
Figure 4 Annual average broadacre farm profit relative 
to rainfall and commodity prices 
Source: ABARES

GrainGrowers | Submission in response to the Evaluation of the Farm Management Deposits (FMD) Scheme | April 2021 
6 
 
 
Industry Support 
Whilst there are support measures provided by the 
Australian Government that seeks to smooth out 
some of the volatility that is inherent with farming and 
grain production, when observed in contrast to 
competitor nations the support is comparatively low. 
In data collected by the OECD on the levels of farm 
support provided in countries around the world. The 
most recent report (2020) reported that Australian 
agriculture receives the lowest for any developed 
nation on earth. When observing the Producer 
Support Estimate (PSE) in the figure below over the 
period of 2000-18 Australian farmers have received an 
average of 3% of their gross farm income as support, 
while Canada has averaged 15%, USA 12, China 11% 
and European farmers have received 25% as support4. 
Australia is the second lowest (just behind New 
Zealand) of countries monitored by the OECD and has 
been steadily reducing over the past two decades.  
The Total Support Estimate (TSE) provided to 
agriculture sectors in the same countries (which 
includes transfers other than direct payments to 
farmers) shown in the figure below demonstrates the 
extremely low level of comparative support provided to 
Australian agriculture. Since 2009, no more than 0.19% 
of Australia’s annual GDP has been provided as 
support to the agriculture sector.  
Farm Structures 
The vast majority of grains farming businesses are family 
owned. In 2018-19, an estimated 23,000 Australian farms 
had at least 40 ha sown to grain, oilseed, or pulse. Over 
the last decade the number of grain farms has fallen by 
around 35%5. Data provided to GrainGrowers illustrates 
that sole proprietors and partnerships combined are the 
most common entity for grains and mixed grain 
operations making up 64%6, trusts account of 32% of 
entities and 4% being companies. This is compared to 
the Australian agricultural businesses with 44%7 being 
partnerships, 33% sole traders, 14% trusts and 9% 
 
4 GrainGrowers & AFI Briefing Paper: Transparency in trade and farmer support via https://www.graingrowers.com.au/wp-content/uploads/AFI-
briefing-paper-Australian-Farm-subsidies-May-2020.pdf  
5  ABARES, Australian grains: Financial performance of grian farms via https://www.agriculture.gov.au/abares/research-
topics/surveys/grains#farm-characteristics  
6 Grains Research Development Corporation, Grains and Mixed Industry farms by State and Legal entity type at June 2020  
7 National Farmers Federation (2017) Food, Fiber & Forestry Facts via https://nff.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2020/01/171116-FINAL-Food-Fibre-
Food-Facts.pdf  
Figure 8 Total support estimate (TSE) by country, 2000-18  
Source: Based on OECD 2020 and GrainGrowers analysis 
Figure 7 Producer support estimate (PSE) by Country, 2000-18 
Source: Based on OECD 2020 and GrainGrowers analysis 
Figure 9 Grains Industry farms by State and Legal entity type 
at June 2020 
Source: ABS, Kynetec, GRDC

GrainGrowers | Submission in response to the Evaluation of the Farm Management Deposits (FMD) Scheme | April 2021 
7 
companies. It also is important to note those businesses in company and trust structures are likely to be largest 
and represent a greater proportion of farm output.  
Productivity  
Productivity is an important metric to observe when 
considering agricultural performance. ABARES via its 
Total Factor Productivity (TFP) work reports that cropping 
productivity growth is at 1.5%2, which has been driven by 
strong output growth (2.5%) relative to the increase in 
input use (1.0% growth). Declines that can be noted can 
be attributed to unfavourable seasonal conditions8.  
Cost of production  
Australian grain farmers’ cost of production tends to be 
high. In a benchmarking report developed by the GRDC9 
(2018) when comparing wheat production to other 
international competitors reported that Australia is not a 
low-cost producer of wheat despite the generally large-
scale nature of our production system. Despite achieving a 
high average price, Australia cannot fundamentally 
compete when considering the low costs others experience 
with inputs and labour.  
When drilling down into a mixed enterprises’ input costs, 
the majority of costs are livestock materials and services 
(45%), fertilisers (15%) and crops and pasture chemicals 
(13%). As figure 12 below highlights the cost of production 
for mixed cropping enterprises is on the rise. And despite 
facing periods of income variability because of events such 
as drought, growers still have costs that cannot be deferred 
or halted. Even without a crop in a field or having 
destocked a farm, there are costs of inputs such as weed and pest management chemicals to ensure that the farm 
is able to make the most of a change in season.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 ABARES, Australian Agriucltural Productivity via https://www.agriculture.gov.au/abares/research-topics/productivity/agricultural-productivity-
estimates  
9 GRDC, Australian wheat international benchmarking via https://grdc.com.au/resources-and-publications/groundcover/groundcover-133-march-
april-2018/australian-wheat-international-benchmarking  
Figure 11 Cost of mixed cropping  
Source: ABARES and GrainGrowers  
Figure 10 Australian Cropping Industry Productivity Data 
Source: ABARES  
Figure 12 Costs of time for 
mixed cropping  
Source: ABARES and 
GrainGrowers

GrainGrowers | Submission in response to the Evaluation of the Farm Management Deposits (FMD) Scheme | April 2021 
8 
Farm Management Deposit Scheme in Grains Industry  
The Scheme has allowed grain growers since 1999 the opportunity to smooth their income over the long term by 
making tax-effective deposits in higher income-years, which can be withdrawn as pre-tax farm income in later 
years. GrainGrowers supports the ongoing provision of the Scheme and believes that it aligns with the 
government’s policy and objectives of encouraging farmers to have greater self-reliance in managing events such 
as drought, climate change and market volatility.  
As of February 2021, the total holdings in the FMD Scheme were $5.27 billion. When observing grains FMD 
accounts overtime, drawdowns occur around the beginning of the financial year which reflects the tax benefits 
associated with the Scheme. However, figures 14 and 15 suggest that in recent times that the value and number of 
account holders saw a dip in 2019.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Since July 2019, NSW, QLD, WA and SA grain growers have taken out $385 million out of FMD accounts reflecting 
the seasonal conditions. It is important to note that this data is solely grain enterprises not mixed with livestock and 
cropping.  
4. USE OF FMDS 
BY THE GRAINS INDUSTRY  
Figure 13 Farm Management Deposit average holding by 
grains industry Source: DAWE 
Figure 14 Farm Management Deposit number of 
account holders Source: DAWE 
Figure 15 Farm Management Deposit Holdings by State. 
Source: DAWE 
Figure 16 Farm Management Deposit in grains industry by 
age Source: DAWE

GrainGrowers | Submission in response to the Evaluation of the Farm Management Deposits (FMD) Scheme | April 2021 
9 
 
 
When observing those who have FMDs, the use of this tool seems to be those later in life (see figure 16). This 
reflects anecdotal evidence collected by GrainGrowers and suggests that the use of FMDs is linked to the stage a 
business is at. Younger growers may be looking to invest any profits back into the business with older growers 
putting capital.  
GrainGrowers 2021 Grower Survey  
In a recent survey conducted from GrainGrowers (2021) with over 700 respondents, 80% (n=559) indicated that 
they have an FMD account or have previously had one. Of those who indicated that they have or are currently 
using an FMD account, 61% (n=339) have drawn down on their FMD in the last 24 months. When observing the 
activities those drawn down funds were allocated to operational and capital improvements (n=168), ongoing 
drought operational costs (n=151) and post drought mitigation activities (n=129). It is worth noting that respondents 
indicated that the funds were used for several activities simultaneously. It is positive to see that many growers 
(n=60) are also using their FMD funds for drought mitigation activities as well as recently announced COVID-
response government taxation incentives such as instant asset write-off and accelerated depreciation.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
When observing the 20% (n=142) who indicated that they do not or have not held an FMD account primary 
impediments or barriers were noted as: 
• 
Insufficient funds (n=94) 
• 
Business operates as a trust (n=42) 
• 
Not enough information available on how FMDs accounts would benefit business (n=42) 
• 
Business operates as a company structure (n=28)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 17 Activities FMD funds were used for 
Source: GrainGrowers’ Member Survey 2021  
Figure 18 Impediments of FMD uptake 
Source: GrainGrowers’ Member Survey 2021

GrainGrowers | Submission in response to the Evaluation of the Farm Management Deposits (FMD) Scheme | April 2021 
10 
 
 
Below outlines several other opportunities for improvement outlined by GrainGrowers’ membership: 
FMDs don't work very well for our business, as the excess funds are generated in a family trust, but it can't 
use FMDs, so they have to go into individuals’ names. On withdrawal the funds cannot be offset against 
production costs as the individuals are not in business, the trust is. In short, the business entity that 
generates the surplus funds in a good year needs to be able to put in FMDs in IT'S OWN NAME so when 
they are withdrawn in a poor year they offset the loss made in the business as they were designed to – 
Grower, NSW.  
Our farming enterprise is operated by our family company of just 2 directors. It is a 100% agricultural 
business and have often felt frustrated that we cannot access the FMDs just because we are a company. 
In the past it would have been another great tool for us to incorporate in our strategic management plan for 
safeguarding ourselves through difficult years. Grower, NSW 
Unable to utilise FMD now as operate as a partnership of family trusts.  Disappointing that in implementing 
succession plan and having structures to facilitate succession and protect assets we are unable to use 
FMDs. Grower, NSW  
Would love for the Company to be able to utilise FMDS.  Would definitely use then. Grower, NSW  
The issue we have with FMDs is that once the money is withdrawn from the FMD it is in the personal name 
of the FMD holder rather the company, which then has tax implications for the individual rather than the 
business. If we do need to draw down on our FMDs we ensure that we put that money back into the FMD 
before the EOFY so the individual does not face those tax implications. Obviously, this may not always be 
possible if funds are not available. Grower, QLD 
Overall, support for FMDs amongst growers is positive. Several indicating that this tool has been necessary and 
important fixture of their business risk management strategy for many of years.  
The FMD got us through the drought. Grower, NSW  
FMD's have been a great tool for our farming business.  Have been using them for 30 years and have 
helped us through drought and the good times. Grower, SA 
FMD's offer a level of financial security to manage seasonal cash flow matters resulting from variable grain 
prices and yield fluctuations. Our FMD's are linked to Loans so interest assists payments on those loans. 
As a small family business this arrangement is valuable to our operations and continued viability. 
Grower, SA 
Our farming operation has been using Farm Management Deposits for over 30 years with great success. 
With ongoing dry seasons, it has been our insurance policy against drought and for upgrading plant and 
machinery giving us peace of mind knowing that we have money set aside to cover costs associated with 
these situations and thereby not relying on Government assistance. Grower, SA 
This is an extremely valuable scheme that has allowed us to put aside money in good years to drought 
proof our farm and helps us sleep at night knowing that we could get through a poor year (drought) without 
having to sell any land or rely on government assistance. Grower, VIC  
We have used FMDs for some time now. Each year we utilise differently. On occasion we have been able 
to add to it in the rare event of two good years in a row! Recently we have not had much cash left by June 
30 to invest and have needed to access FMD as capital to keep us going, which has been very reassuring 
and especially useful. I would hope the programme could continue. Grower, SA

GrainGrowers | Submission in response to the Evaluation of the Farm Management Deposits (FMD) Scheme | April 2021 
11 
 
 
 
 
Details  
For over two d ecad es FMDs have b een used b y the 
Buckleb oo enterp rise. With an estim ated annual cost 
of p rod uction of $1.2 m illion each year, the 
op p ortunity to set asid e $80 0 ,0 0 0 in reserves to 
m anag e the cost of p rod uction is an essential p art of 
this op eration’s risk m anag em ent strateg y. 
The d ecision to incorp orate FMDs into the p lan was 
m ad e in consultation with the b usinesses long -term 
accountant coup led with the fam ilies’ knowled g e and 
exp erience of the ind ustry.  
The last three years b eing 20 18 -20 20 , annual rainfall 
for this SA farm has b een well b elow averag e. When 
consid ering whether to d raw d own on their FMDs the 
Bald ocks had a conversation with their accountant 
reg ard ing cash flow. Without incom e d erived from 
crop s, the d iscussion with their accountant consisted 
of looking at com b ination of increasing the overd raft 
and facility of the b usiness and 
the d rawing 
d own of FMDs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
and d rawing d own on FMDs. Tax im p lications were a 
p art of that d iscussion esp ecially in the context of 
incom e averag ing .  
The Bald ock’s have d rawn d own on their FMDs for the 
last three years to assist with running costs for the 
b usiness which includ es staff wag es, inp uts, 
overhead s, and b usiness d e velop m ent. Many of these 
costs cannot b e p ut on hold and if so, would b e of 
d etrim ent to the sustainab ility of the enterp rise long 
term .  
Tristan b elieves that the FMDs have enab led his 
fam ily’s b usiness to continue to op erate and without 
this tool the b usiness would b e worse off. Recovery 
from the p ast three years would have b een a lot 
long er and would have seen the need to consid er 
other g overnm ent assistance and increasing d eb t.  
Grower Profile 
Tristan Baldock. Operate a 60 0 0 ha cropping operation 
with wife Lisa and Parents Graeme and Heather at 
Buckleboo, on SA’s Eyre Peninsula. Grow wheat, barley, 
canola, peas, lentils, vetch hay and export oaten hay. 
Low rainfall environm ent, with less than 30 0 mm annually. 
GROWER CASE STUDY 
Tristan Baldock, SA Grain Farm er 
Farm Management Deposits and drought  
“FMDs are a g reat schem e and a very im p ortant tool, b uild ing cap acity and resilience to allow farm ers to 
b etter p re p are for and m anag e d roug ht.” – Tristan Bald ock  
The p ast three years (20 18 -20 20 ) have b een d ifficult for Tristan and his fam ily receiving less than half of 
their annual rainfall, ad d ing p ressure to the com p lex op erating environm ent, that is farm ing . As a fourth-
g eneration farm ing op eration Buckleb oo p rid es itself of op erating und er the p rincip les of b est p ractice 
ag ronom ics, and sound b usiness p ractices b ut d esp ite the b est efforts m ulti-seaso nal d roug ht events d o 
occur. For over a d ecad e, the Bald ock’s have used Farm Manag em ent Dep o sits interm ittently.  
The ab ility to b uild up reserves over tim e has worked to the b usiness and fam ilies’ ad vantag e recently 
assisting with cash flow. FMDs are viewed as one com p onent to the Buckleb oo enterp rise risk m itig ation 
strateg y. FMDs are viewed as one com p onent to the Buckleb oo enterp rise risk m itig ation strateg y.

GrainGrowers | Submission in response to the Evaluation of the Farm Management Deposits (FMD) Scheme | April 2021 
12 
GrainGrowers believes that the Scheme is one tool in a suite of measures that growers need to access to manage 
the risks associated with climate change and market fluctuations. GrainGrowers believes that FMDs are an 
effective tool that require some adjustments to ensure they reflect the realities of farming practices. 
It is important to note that grain growers, do not make decisions regarding their business and its cropping 
operations in isolation. The use of trusted advisors be they agronomic or financial experts are important to the 
success of a farming business. The decision to take out an FMD is often done in collaboration and from advice 
provided by either an accountant, financial planner, bank manager or all in combination. Of those surveyed, 42 
respondents indicated that information or understanding of the Scheme is a barrier to uptake. If the government 
were considering opportunities to improve understanding of the FMD scheme, this should be done in consultation 
and collaboration with those trusted advisors of farm finance and not in isolation.  
In recent years, the impacts of drought have also influenced the decision of many growers to engage in the 
Scheme choosing to place any income back into the business to address the ongoing cost of operating. This was 
noted in the GrainGrowers’ survey with drought and operational costs identified as primary reasons for drawdowns 
in the last 24 months (refer to Section 3)   
Currently, FMDs assist some grain growing enterprises in achieving the policy intent to support farmers in 
managing the risks associated with climate variability and market fluctuations, however there are impediments or 
barriers preventing some farmers from deriving value and becoming more financially self-reliant. Below are 
recommendations that GrainGrowers believes will address such barriers that are preventing the policy intent being 
achieved by all farming enterprises.  
Access of Company and Trust Structures  
GrainGrowers believes that FMDs should be made available to all farming businesses rather than solely available 
to individuals. As outlined in the 2012 Tax in Agriculture10 paper there is inequality in the current system where 
companies and trusts are excluded. In addition, the current arrangements forgo consideration that the activities of 
farming are the responsibility of the individual rather than that of the business entity. With trusts accounting of 32% 
of structures in the grains sector it is important that the Department of Agriculture, Water and Environment consider 
this position. In the 2021, GrainGrowers survey of the 142 respondents who do not use FMDs, 70 indicated that 
their business structure is impeding upon their ability to access and engage with the Scheme. GrainGrowers 
acknowledges that there would be a need to measures are in place to avoid any harm to the Scheme’s integrity.  
Recommendation 
Farm Management Deposits should be made available to all farming business (i.e. companies and 
trusts) to improve uptake and effectiveness as a risk management tool.  
 
 
10 Australian Government, Rural Industries Research and Development Corporation, Tax in Agriculture (2016) accessed via 
https://www.boyceca.com/assets/uploads/1/files/Tax%20in%20Agriculture.pdf  
4. IMPROVEMENTS TO  
FMDS

GrainGrowers | Submission in response to the Evaluation of the Farm Management Deposits (FMD) Scheme | April 2021 
13 
Treatment at time of cessation  
Upon the unexpected cessation of a grain grower due to illness of health or death, an FMD must be withdrawn in 
full that tax year. This can result in excessive taxation liability which can impair the work of prior tax planning. This 
issue also fails to see that the activity of the business typically still carriers on either by a spouse, business partner 
or succession children. Ultimately the business is disadvantaged and the individual at risk. It is GrainGrowers’ 
belief that the FMD should be brought back into the business over a two-to-three-year period (through the estate of 
the deceased) or alternatively the additional income taxed at an average tax rate. Consideration needs to be given 
to how this recommendation is treated if the executors seek to dissolve the estate in a shorter period.   
Recommendation 
Farm Management Deposits to be brought in line with taxation rules regarding the treatment of a 
taxpayer when they pass away. Specifically, being that the Australian Government enables FMDs to 
be brough into account over a 2 or 3-year period, or the additional income taxed at average rates, 
upon the unexpected cessation of a primary producer.  
Individual holdings in Farm Management Deposits 
GrainGrowers has previously called for the cap of the FMD scheme to be increased to the current level of $800,000 
to better reflect the evolving nature of farm businesses and maintaining its value in real terms over time. Whilst this 
recent policy change was welcomed, GrainGrowers believes that the issue of the holdings limit should be 
considered as part of the ongoing evaluation of the FMD scheme’s effectiveness in the context of does it remain 
relevant to the agricultural industry overtime. The current cap of $800,000 was assessed in the context of the 2015 
Agricultural Competitiveness White Paper11 and whilst consideration was given the trend of increasing farm size 
and input costs in half a decade thing have continued to increase and risk exposure to climate change has also 
risen.  
Recommendation 
The Australian Government undertake a review of the Farm Management Deposit threshold cap with 
full engagement and consultation with industry. The review of the cap should be included in the 
scope of the ongoing evaluation process undertaken by the Department of Agriculture, Water and 
Environment.   
“Non-primary producer” income definition and threshold  
GrainGrowers’ believes that it is the right of individual grain growers and their business to make the decision on 
how best to manage their risks. It is also important to recognise that growers are not making these decisions on 
their own. Like using professional agronomic advice, grain growers are all too familiar with accessing professional 
services such as accountants, bank managers and financial planners to advise on the best risk management 
strategies for that enterprise and what stage it is at. Through this advice diversifying risk through other income 
streams becomes a common occurrence within the agricultural industry. As noted earlier in this submission, cost of 
production is continuing to increase and even in a year when growers choose not to plant because of seasonal 
conditions there are still financial responsibilities that need to be appropriately managed.   
GrainGrowers, believes that under the current definition of ‘non-primary producer” certain activities that are 
becomingly increasingly common to farming are being overlooked. Such activities relate to carbon farming and 
alternative energy sources. GrainGrowers would like to see the Australian Government review the definition in 
addition to considering if the threshold of $100,000 is appropriate given the current operating environment.  
 
11 Australian Government, Agricultural Competitiveness White Paper (2015) accessed via 
https://www.agriculture.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/ag-competitiveness-white-paper_0.pdf

GrainGrowers | Submission in response to the Evaluation of the Farm Management Deposits (FMD) Scheme | April 2021 
14 
 
 
Recommendation 
The ‘non-primary production’ income eligibility to be reviewed and consideration be made to ensure 
it reflected modern business practices. 
Reporting and evaluation  
GrainGrowers supports the ongoing evaluation of all government programs and policies to deliver continuous 
improvement. This current FMD review seeks to make comments on the effectiveness of the Scheme based upon 
particular ‘in-scope’ elements. GrainGrowers would like to see FMD reviews to report on indicators and the success 
of the FMD program relating to their impact on business resilience and self-relance.  
Through engagement in this review process, the agricultural industry has been asked how participation rates in the 
FMD scheme could be improved. GrainGrowers believes this is a very narrow instrument for determining success 
of the program. Further engagement with industry needs to occur to ensure that the effectiveness and success of 
the program is appropriate. For an instrument such as ‘participation’ or ‘uptake’ simplifies the situation and does not 
consider the complexity of agriculture, the structures of operations, and the broader environment. Currently, 23%12 
of the 93,000 farmers eligible for the FMD scheme have taken up the product. To suggest this number is not a 
measure of success would be disappointing. There is a significant amount of farmer invested funds in the Scheme 
which has a significant impact upon a business’ resilience either as a financial reserve or when drawn down and 
put back into the business. To report this number without consideration of the wider narrative is not helpful for the 
scheme or the industry. Context is significant, for example, someone may choose not to engage for they are in a 
business phase of growth and are seeking to reinvest any profit back into the business.  
Recommendation 
Australian Government to review and strengthen key performance indicators for the Scheme and 
expand consideration of success beyond uptake of mechanism by farm businesses.  
 
 
12 Department of Agriculture, Water and Environment (2021) via Farm Management Desposit consultations

GrainGrowers | Submission in response to the Evaluation of the Farm Management Deposits (FMD) Scheme | April 2021 
15 
GrainGrowers welcomes the opportunity to provide a submission to the Evaluation of the Farm Management 
Deposits Scheme. The grains industry has continued to provide significant contributions to the Australian economy 
and public good. It is critical the growers are empowered to manage the volatility of production, climate, and 
markets, irrespective of the size of their operation. Given there remains no insurance available to growers to 
manage drought and cropping losses, FMDs remain a useful tool to protect farmers.  
 
Once again, we fundamentally believe that Farm Management Deposits Scheme (FMDs) and should be continued 
with improvements made considering the recommendations outlined in this submission.  Should you require any 
further information in relation to this submission, please contact GrainGrowers’ Policy Manager, Rural Affairs, 
Amelia Shaw on amelia.shaw@graingrowers.com.au or on (02) 9286 2006.  
CONCLUSION

GrainGrowers | Submission in response to the Evaluation of the Farm Management Deposits (FMD) Scheme | April 2021 
16 
 
Stay in touch with GrainGrowers 
Please visit us online or email 
if you would like to hear more! 
 
1800 620 519 
 enquiry@graingrowers.com.au 
 www.graingrowers.com.au 
 @GrainGrowersLtd 
 GrainGrowers 
 @graingrowers 
 @Grain Growers Limited