National Australia Bank700 Bourke StDocklands VIC 3008
26 April
202
1
Farm Management Deposits Scheme Evaluation TeamDepartment of Agriculture, Water and Envi
ronment 
Via email: 
FMDS.Evaluation@agriculture.gov.au
Dear 
Sir/MadamNational Australia Bank (NAB) welcomes the opportunity to provide 
input to the Farm Management 
Deposit Scheme
Evaluation
by the Department of Agriculture, Water and Environment
. 
As Australia’s largest business bank
and 
largest 
provider of finance to the 
agriculture sector
, NAB
’s view 
is that the Farm Management Deposits Scheme
(FMDS) has been an important source of support for 
customers
.The Evaluation is also a timely review given the most recent changes 
were made to the FMDS 
in 2016. Following those c
hanges, NAB was pleased to be the first major bank in July 2018 to offer customers the 
financial benefit 
of being able to offset their F
arm 
M anagement 
D eposit (FMD)
against their agriculture 
lending in the form of a discount to their lending interest rate.How FMDs are being usedNAB believes that primary producers are utilising FMDs to manage their cash flow during times of natural disasters or drought. 
FMDs allow producers to set aside pre
-tax income in years of stronger performance 
that can then be acce
ssed in years of lower production. 
As a risk management tool, FMDs help primary 
producers manage uneven income patterns that often exist in the sector. NAB has also observed differences in behaviour by customers between jurisdictions that would indicate this is the case. In the 12
-months to March 2020, around $40 million was withdrawn by NAB customers 
in the drought impacted states of Queensland and New South Wales. In comparison, 
the lesser drought 
impacted states 
of Western Australia, Victoria and Tasmania 
recorded deposits totalling approximately 
$60 million
.Geographically, NAB has also observed greater drawdowns from NSW customers in calendar 
year 2020 (likely due to the impact of drought and bushfires) than customers in other states.
There is 
a clear annual trend in NAB data and 
data from the Department of Agriculture, Water and 
Environment that there is an increase in income deposited into FMD accounts in the June quarter, and then withdrawals in the September quarter based on the taxation treat
ment of FMDs. 
Non
-primary production income cap NAB notes that currently a primary producer must earn less than $100,000 in non
-primary production 
income in the financial year they make a deposit.
This threshold was last increased from $65,000 to 
$100,0
00 in 2014.
Given the increased diversification of income that some primary producers are 
undertaking, 
and the length of time since the last increase, 
NAB
’s view is
that consideration should be 
given to increasing this cap. NAB is seeing primary production
customers diversify
ing their income across 
sector
s and through new offerings such as 
agri tourism or hospitality 
hosted on 
agricultural premise
s , 
particularly following the impact of COVID
- 19 . This innovation in finding alternative sources of income 
should
be considered in 
reviewing the cap. NAB believes that a higher cap of between $150,000 and 
$200,000 should be considered
along with an annual Consumer Price Index adjustment. A higher limit 
and the introduction of indexation would allow primary producers 
more flexibility and certainty in 
planning through the cycle.
Off farm income also helps build resilience for producers against natural 
disasters and droughts and these diversified income streams should be supported beyond the current limit on non
-primary 
production income.

Tax appl
ication
Currently, income deposited into a
n FMD account is 
tax deductible in that financial year and becomes 
taxable income in the year 
in which it is withdrawn. NAB encourages the Evaluation to consider whether 
further t ax concessions on the withdrawal of money from FMD
s are appropriate
in order
to remove any 
disincentive to access this money
. Anecdotally, NAB knows that
some farmers can be reluctant to 
withdraw funds in a timely manner to reduce financial stress, 
knowing that once FMDs are withdrawn 
tax becomes payable. Structures should support the ability for more timely decision
-making, rather than 
decision
-making being driven based on the date of draw down and consequential tax impact.
Options could 
include
al lowing producers facing financial difficult
y to withdraw a certain small 
percentage of their FMD 
holding without requiring it to be declared as income. Alternatively,
the tax 
payable on the withdrawal of an FMD could be deferred and paid 
across
that financ
ial year and the 
following financial year. NAB acknowledges that these changes would need clear eligibility criteria to ensure that primary producers did not seek to make withdrawals simply for concessional tax treatment and w ere only accessible for
produc ers who qualified as facing some form of financial difficulty. 
Security as lending NAB has previously proposed that FMDs be permitted to 
be used as security for lending. 
This
could
give 
farmers access to additional security as capital for banks to lend against.
Allowing FMDs as security could 
also be considered in lending pricing considerations. NAB believes that this change is worth
strong consideration but important factors such
as
the 
subsequent limited liquidity of funds used as security should
be evaluated before any change is made
.
The impact will also vary depending on individual business circumstances. For example, where lendingis secured against property/land
, the benefit
to the producer may be marginal
.Where such security does 
not exist though then the benefit could be more significant.
One option could be allowing only a certain 
percentage of an individual’s FMD to be used as security against lending. Other matters NAB notes the Evaluation’s terms of reference do not permit consideration of the $800,000 FMD deposit threshold or whether the FMDS should be extended to other business structures such as companies and trusts. NAB encourages the Government to consider th
es e features to ensure they remain fit
- for
-purpose
either via a further review or direct consultation with the agricultural industry
. 
ConclusionNAB is happy to share 
further data 
with 
the Evaluation 
that may be 
helpful 
in relation to the usage of 
FMDs by 
customers. If you have any questions about this submission then please contact Chris Venus, 
Head of
Public Policy 
on chris.venus@nab.com.au
or 0477 306 694. 
Your
s sincerely
Julie RynskiCustomer Executive
– Regional and Agribusiness 
National Australia Bank