ADELAIDE ROAD, BROKEN HILL, NEW SOUTH WALES 2880 
POSTAL ADDRESS:  P O BOX 279, BROKEN HILL NEW SOUTH WALES 2880 
TELEPHONE: (08) 80873322 FACSIMILE: (08) 80882051 
Email pawd01@bigpond.net.au 
Website:  pawd.org.au 
 
 
Pastoralists’ Association  
 
of West Darling Inc. 
 
Registered under NSW Government Fair Trading 
 
 
16th April, 2021 
 
Farm Management Deposit Scheme Evaluation 2021 Submission  
 
The Pastoralists’ Association of West Darling (PAWD) has been representing the interests of 
pastoralists in the far west of NSW since 1907, and takes this opportunity to make the following 
submission to the Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment (DAWE) evaluation 
team. 
 
The Western Division of NSW recently experienced the lowest recorded rainfall over any four year 
period on record from 2017 to 2020.  The majority of agriculture businesses in the area are solely 
livestock production businesses.  During this four year period almost all business activity was 
curtailed from less than forty percent of normal capacity to zero capacity.  The following three 
case studies are members lived experiences which have been generalised for privacy reasons. 
 
In 2019 at the height of the drought Producer 1 withdrew one hundred thousand dollars from 
FMD’s.  This was used to purchase sixty thousand dollars’ worth of fencing material and the 
remainder was used to pay a contractor to install the fencing, with the following outcomes. 
• Producer 1 was able to continue with the farm improvement program without 
jeopardising existing cash flow. 
• Jobs were created for local contractors at a time when there was a severe downturn in 
available work assisting the contractor to remain working in the area. 
• The additional fencing gave Producer 1 extra capacity to manage livestock under very 
trying circumstances. 
 
After purchasing a property in 2015, Producer 2 was faced with buying stockfeed during the 
period of 2017 to 2020.  Supplementary feeding in western NSW is mostly only undertaken during 
times of severe drought.  Whilst all producers have the ability to stockpile feed, the length and 
severity of this drought depleted feed stocks nationwide, causing price increases of over two 
hundred percent in some cases.  Producer 2 was also destocking to maintain cash flow and reduce 
feed costs. 
• Producer 2 was able roll over FMD’s to purchase feed, this eliminated the need to sell 
stock to maintain cash flow or redraw on existing facilities.   
• With the use of FMD’s Producer 2 was able to exit the drought with additional stock 
numbers while meeting repayment obligations and not increasing debt load on a flegling 
business venture.

Pastoralists’ Association of West Darling 
 
2 
 
 
 
Producer 3 made the decision early to completely destock and put the proceeds into FMD’s until 
the drought was over, and has since used the FMD’s to restock. 
• Producer 3 was able to safeguard what was “forced sale” income and reduce the risk of a 
tax shock when cash flow had stopped. 
• Producer 3 now has the ability to withdraw FMD’s to continue to restock and has cash 
flow to meet taxation requirements.    
 
The three producers in the case studies have used FMD’s in a different way, but all have come 
through the drought in a much better position than if the facility was not available to them.  This 
added self-reliability has reduced the need for government intervention, reduced finical stress and 
kept the businesses viable in the harshest of droughts.  
 
Agriculture is unique in the way to which it is exposed to risks associated with variations in the 
weather.  Accordingly, cashflow can be very erratic and difficult to manage.  The FMD system is a 
very useful tool for moderating the peaks and troughs in income and expenditure. 
 
Access to the FMD system encourages the sale of livestock when they need to go as drought 
approaches, otherwise livestock producers may be inclined to hold some livestock sales over into a 
new financial year.  Doing so could be a bad outcome in terms of welfare of the livestock, and the 
condition of the land they are running on.   
 
The Western Division of NSW has a widely varying rainfall, and livestock markets are at the whim 
of many outside factors and can also vary extensively.  PAWD fully supports the current FMD 
system and that the status quo is maintained.   
 
For additional information please do not hesitate to contact the Association via the contact details 
below.     
 
Yours faithfully, 
 
Terry Smith. 
Senior Vice President.