TFGA Submission: Farm Management Deposits Scheme Evaluation 
 
 
 
 
 
Farm Management Deposits Scheme Evaluation 
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
GPO Box 858 
Canberra ACT 2601 
Email: FMDS.Evaluation@agriculture.gov.au   
 
TFGA Submission: Farm Management Deposits Scheme Evaluation 
 
The Tasmanian Farmers and Graziers Association (TFGA) is the leading representative body for 
Tasmanian primary producers. TFGA members are responsible for generating approximately 80% of 
the value created by the Tasmanian agricultural sector.  
Agriculture is one of the key pillars of the economy and, with the current level of support from the 
government, are well positioned to further capitalise on the stature of Tasmanian agriculture. 
The TFGA appreciates the opportunity to make comment on the Farm Management Deposits 
Scheme (FMDS) Evaluation. The FMDS is an important financial risk management tool available to 
eligible primary producers which encourages increased financial self-reliance and preparedness for 
fluctuations in cash flow. As of February 2021, there was approximately $93 million1 held in FMD 
accounts by Tasmanian primary producers and approximately $5.27 billion nationally.  
There are several factors that can impact the cash flow of a primary production business from year 
to year, including market fluctuations and climatic variability. The ability to set aside pre-tax income 
derived from primary production activities during years of high income which can be withdrawn 
during years of low income, allows farm businesses to continue operating throughout difficult 
periods which are often a result of factors that are unable to be controlled eg. drought.   
Timing is critical in agriculture, and outside factors like weather events have the capability to 
severely impact farm operations at crucial times such as during harvest or shearing, which can have 
significant impact on a business’ income for that year. Market fluctuations can also have significant 
impact, and whilst there are other methods to help mitigate these risks such as increased on farm 
storage, there are times when being negatively impacted by market instability is unavoidable.  
While there are additional forms of government assistance available to primary producers including 
income tax averaging, the Farm Household Allowance (FHA) and concessional farm business loans 
which can assist with cash flow management, it is important to note that each scheme is unique and 
each can be suitable/unsuitable for different business models. One of the key advantages of the 
 
1 Farm Management Deposits Statistics, ABARES https://www.agriculture.gov.au/ag-farm-
food/drought/assistance/fmd/statistics#2021

TFGA Submission: Farm Management Deposits Scheme Evaluation 
 
FMDS is that it allows account holders to be more financially self-reliant and access funds promptly 
and at the most appropriate time for their business.  
As seen in recent years, the FHA scheme and concessional farm business loans are well utilised by 
primary producers across Australia. Applying for these schemes can be a complex and confusing task 
for many, and the application process is often accompanied with lengthy waiting periods before any 
funding can be approved. This is particularly disadvantageous to businesses that may be struggling 
as a result of climatic factors such as prolonged drought or severe flooding and require more 
immediate assistance.  
The 2016 review of the FMDS saw three policy changes introduced, one of which being that primary 
producers experiencing severe drought conditions can now access FMDs within 12 months of deposit 
without losing their claimed tax concession. The addition of this policy to the FMDS is particularly 
valuable and allows primary producers to be self-reliant and maximise the benefits of the scheme 
when they need it most.  
While it is noted in the FMDS Evaluation terms of reference that expansion of the FMDS to include 
other business structures is out of scope, further consideration to this point is something that the 
TFGA would be highly supportive of. Many farm businesses are structured as family trusts and 
expanding the scheme to allow these businesses to access the FMDS would further increase financial 
self-reliance and give them the ability to broaden their risk management plans.  
The TFGA believes that the FMDS is an extremely valuable tool for building resilience within the 
agricultural industry and would again like to thank the Department of Agriculture, Water and the 
Environment for the opportunity to comment on the FMDS Evaluation.  
 
If you have any questions regarding this submission, please feel free to contact me. 
 
Yours sincerely, 
 
 
 
 
 
John McKew 
Chief Executive Officer 
23 April 2021