Farm Household Allowance (FHA) is an Australian 
Government support package available to eligible 
farmers and their partners. It gives farming families 
practical support to assess their situation and plan 
their long-term financial security.
Training providers 
If you have a specialised skill and train others with 
your expertise, FHA recipients may want to access 
your training.
People who receive FHA have a $10,000 Activity 
Supplement available to help develop skills, access 
training and pay for advice to improve their long-
term financial position. Thousands of people have 
already accessed the Activity Supplement with tens 
of millions of dollars paid. There is a diverse range 
of training activities to help them achieve financial 
self-reliance.
FHA can support recipients to undertake your 
training. If approved, your fee could be paid directly 
or you could receive upfront payment from a 
participant who will be reimbursed.
Businesses that are not a Registered 
Training Organisation 
If you are a training provider who is not a Registered 
Training Organisation (RTO), you can still take part if 
you meet a couple of key requirements.
As a small business operator, it will put your mind at 
ease to know that if your training is approved by the 
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry 
and the trainee has attended, payment is guaranteed 
at the agreed cost.
You are also helping to upskill rural Australia. Aside 
from business and farm-based training, approvals 
have been given for a diverse range of activities that 
can help generate income on-farm or off-farm.
Assessment Process
Each Non-RTO request is assessed on its own merits 
– there is no hard pass / fail. The training offered by a 
Non-RTO can be niche, unique or mainstream.
There are a few things we need:
 
 Proposed learning outcomes
 
 Business insurance
We will also ask you about:
 
 Qualification/s of the trainer/s
 
 Experience in delivering training
 
 Membership of professional / industry 
organisations
Once you’ve provided this information you won’t 
need to supply it again if more FHA recipients are 
interested in your training, unless your insurance 
needs updating or your trainers change.
Farm Household Allowance 
Training Providers and the $10,000 
Activity Supplement
July 2023
If the activity is not approved for 
reimbursement, the participant can still 
undertake the training at their own expense.
agriculture.gov.au
More information
If you are a Non-RTO provider and 
have any questions about eligibility, or 
want clarification, please email  
fha@aff.gov.au
For any other enquiries about the FHA 
program, call the Farmer Assistance 
Hotline on 132 316 from 8am to 5pm 
each weekday.

Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry
agriculture.gov.au
AGR048.0423
Non-RTO Asessment Process Chart
The $10,000 Activity Supplement
The $10,000 Activity Supplement available to FHA 
recipients is taxpayer funding to help develop skills, 
access training or receive professional advice with 
a view to assist farming families to improve their 
financial circumstances.
Services Australia assesses requests relating 
to professional advice and Registered Training 
Organisation (RTO) training. The Department of 
Agriculture Fisheries and Forestry assesses Non-RTO 
requests. Previous approvals show that most training 
costs between $600 to $3,000.
Previous examples of training include:
 
 Business and accounting courses
 
 Computer and web design courses
 
 Leadership and strategy courses
 
 Pasture and grazing management training
 
 Marketing courses
 
 Risk management training
 
 Animal husbandry training
 
 Chemical and food safety certification
 
 Regenerative land management training
 
 Natural resource management courses
 
 Pilot licence training
 
 Heavy vehicle training
 
 Yoga and massage courses
 
 Aerial drone training
This is not an exhaustive list but it does highlight a 
diverse range of training approvals.
Acknowledgement of Country
We acknowledge the Traditional Custodians of Australia and their 
continuing connection to land and sea, waters, environment and 
community. We pay our respects to the Traditional Custodians of 
the lands we live and work on, their culture, and their Elders past 
and present.
© Commonwealth of Australia 2023
Unless otherwise noted, copyright (and any other intellectual 
property rights) in this publication is owned by the 
Commonwealth of Australia (referred to as the Commonwealth).
All material in this publication is licensed under a Creative 
Commons Attribution 4.0 International Licence except content 
supplied by third parties, logos and the Commonwealth Coat  
of Arms.
The Australian Government acting through the Department of 
Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry has exercised due care and 
skill in preparing and compiling the information and data in this 
publication. Notwithstanding, the Department of Agriculture, 
Fisheries and Forestry, its employees and advisers disclaim 
all liability, including liability for negligence and for any loss, 
damage, injury, expense or cost incurred by any person as a 
result of accessing, using or relying on any of the information or 
data in this publication to the maximum extent permitted by law.
Non-RTO request sent to Services Australia
Request + provider’s details sent to the  
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry
The Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and 
Forestry assesses the request
Services Australia notified of assessment
If approved 
procees as 
agreed
If rejected 
the person can 
self-fund their 
participation
FHA participant completes training and is on a 
pathway to financial recovery
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry
Farm Household Allowance
agriculture.gov.au