Australia’s illegal logging law reforms
As of 3 March 2025, Australia’s illegal logging laws have changed. Importantly, this includes changes to due diligence requirements for importers and processors of regulated timber and timber products.
The Illegal Logging Prohibition Act 2012 has been updated to ensure it remains fit-for-purpose and aligns with international best practice. The new Illegal Logging Prohibition Rules 2024 replace the previous Illegal Logging Regulation 2012 and outline the updated due diligence requirements.
Two reforms introduced in the new laws are not implemented at this time. These two reforms are:
- The use of timber testing technologies to verify product claims related to species and/or origin.
- The notification requirement to receive due diligence information prior to the importation or processing of timber products.
Implementing these reforms effectively will take some time as it requires establishing the necessary IT systems. We will provide appropriate notice and guidance before they are implemented.
In the meantime, importers and processors are required to meet their due diligence requirements and keep prescribed records.
We have updated our guidance material accordingly and strongly encourage our regulated community to ensure you are familiar with all changes and what it means for you. Please visit our resources for importers or resources for processors webpages to access this material.
Visit our legislation review and consultation page for information on the extensive review process that informed changes to these laws.
Australia’s illegal logging prohibition laws
Since 2012, Australia’s illegal logging prohibition laws have been in place to combat illegal logging and promote the trade of legal timber products.
These laws are set out in the Illegal Logging Prohibition Act 2012 and the Illegal Logging Prohibition Rules 2024.
If you import wood, pulp or paper products into Australia, or process Australian grown raw logs, these laws affect you. You have legal responsibilities and need to know your obligations.
Under Australian law, illegal logging means ‘the harvesting of timber in contravention of the laws of the country where the timber is harvested’.
This typically includes but is not limited to:
- logging of protected or endangered species
- logging in protected or prohibited areas
- logging without permits or with fake or illegal permits
- excessive logging beyond what is permitted
- using illegal harvest methods
- non-payment of taxes and other forest fees.
By complying with the laws, you are doing your part to combat the destructive impacts of trade of illegally logging and trade in illegally logged timber. You will also be supporting local investment, profitability and jobs.
Watch a video explaining why Australia has the illegal logging laws
Video transcript
If you have difficulty accessing these files, contact us for help.
Illegal logging is a major global problem. The theft, laundering and trade of illegal timber happens across the world, in all types of forests. Driven mostly by profit, illegal logging has negative impacts on forest ecosystems, communities and economies.
Illegal logging has been linked to:
- organised crime
- civil wars
- murder
- corruption
- species extinction
- environmental destruction
The trade of illegally logged timber is recognised as one of the largest environmental crimes by value in the world. In 2021, Interpol estimated that the trade of illegally logged timber is valued between USD 51-152 billion annually, accounting for 15-30% of global timber trade and representing a major loss in tax revenues. While these estimates highlight the scale of the illegal timber trade, they do not capture its full impact. In 2019, The Global Wildlife Program and the World Bank Group identified that additional financial, economic, social and political impacts are not fully accounted for in the estimated financial values of transnational crimes.
Australia is not immune to the trade of illegally logged timber. In 2013, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime estimated that up to US$500 million (approximately A$700 million) of our annual timber imports were potentially from high-risk sources every year. We have also seen isolated cases of high-value Australian timber being illegally logged.
Your responsibilities
Australia’s illegal logging laws place different obligations on different people:
Importers
If you import wood, pulp, or paper products into Australia you have legal responsibilities. You need to ensure you are not importing products that contain illegally logged timber.
Read information for importers.
Domestic processors
If you process Australian grown raw logs, you have legal responsibilities. You need to ensure you are not processing illegally logged timber.
Read information for processors.
Customs brokers
Customs brokers are not directly affected by the illegal logging laws.
However, your clients may ask for help understanding their legal responsibilities.
Read information for customs brokers.
Overseas suppliers
Overseas suppliers are not directly affected by the illegal logging laws.
However, your Australian customers may ask for information about the timber in your wood, pulp and paper products. This may include information about where the timber has come from and the common and scientific names of the trees of the timber in your products. They may also request information on the entities involved in the supply chain for the timber in the product.
Read information for overseas suppliers.
Exporting from Australia
Businesses exporting timber products from Australia are not directly affected by Australia’s illegal logging laws. However, you may have other legal responsibilities and your products may be subject to other countries’ illegal logging laws.
For more information on exporting Australian timber, please see information for exporters and Wood Export Licensing.
Reporting illegal timber
We are always interested to hear about potential illegal timber sources. If you have information about trade in potentially illegally logged timber, you can call us on 1800 803 006 for a confidential discussion or provide this information anonymously via this online form: Report Illegal Logging.
Get updates
To receive updates, guidance, and information about upcoming events, subscribe to our illegal logging mailing list.