Water and the Environment

Future

Drought

Fund

Future Drought Fund

Natural Resource 

Management (NRM) 

Drought Resilience 

Program

April 

2021

The Natural Resource Management Drought Resilience 

Program has 2 streams – Grants and Landscapes. 

It provides funding for farmer groups, NRM bodies, and 

agricultural organisations to adopt land management 

practices and technologies that improve the drought 

resilience of agricultural lands.

Funding

$13.4 million was allocated through the following 

competitive processes: 

•	 $7.8 million landscapes stream - open only to Regional 

Natural Resource Management bodies.

•	 $5.6 million grants stream - open to all.

Need for the program

The Program promotes transformational on-ground 

practices, networks and partnerships that contribute to 

the drought resilience of agricultural landscapes.

Stronger farm performance and resilience to drought 

and other climate risks can be achieved through 

improved management of natural capital, such as:

•	 soils

•	 water

•	 groundcover

•	 vegetation. 

The Drought Resilience Funding Plan 2020-2024 

prioritises the environmental resilience of agricultural 

landscapes. This includes building drought resilience 

through improved natural capital management.  

Key points

•	The $13.4 million Natural 

Resource Management 

Drought Resilience Program 

is a key part of the Future 

Drought Fund.

•	80 funded projects will 

support demonstration 

and adoption of land 

management practices.

•	Projects start by mid-2021.

Natural Resource Management (NRM) Drought Resilience Program

For more information

agriculture.gov.au/fdf

Projects

The successful projects involve:

•	 testing and demonstrating new farming practices, including 

the use of different pasture/forage varieties and novel 

grazing strategies

•	 tracking and forecasting pasture biomass to plan operations 

and schedule decision points

•	 using drought tolerant native trees and shrub species 

as windbreaks

•	 experimenting with new and innovative ways to maintain 

continuous live ground cover

•	 analysing soil moisture to assist in preparing and responding 

to drought conditions

•	 Peer-to-peer learning and sharing the latest thinking on 

drought resilience.

NRM Landscape projects started in February 2021. NRM Grants 

projects start from mid-2021.  Details of each project are available 

on the department’s website: agriculture.gov.au/ag-farm-food/

drought/future-drought-fund/nrm-landscapes.

ADA183.0421