Ground cover information is critical for land management and the assessment of soil condition in
Australia. Recognising the need for a national approach, the Ground Cover Monitoring for Australia
Fisheries and Forestry (DAFF), CSIRO, the Terrestrial Ecosystem Research Network and states and
territories. The project is delivering estimates of Australian ground cover at 500 metre resolution from
Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) satellite data. The project is managed by
From March 2000 MODIS data has been processed using the Guerschman fractional cover method
(version 2.2) with field observations used to validate the ground cover estimates. In 2013 extra
observations will be used to improve these estimates. Ground cover estimates as raw or summarised
MODIS data and field observations can be accessed at remote-sensing.nci.org.au/u39/public/html/.
Summaries include mean, maximum, minimum, standard deviations and period of minimum or
maximum cover for each fraction. Figure 1 shows example ground cover and associated rainfall data.
Previous studies show that wind erosion is more likely to occur when ground cover is less than 50 per
cent. Wind erosion can be monitored through observation of dust. As an example, the Community
DustWatch project, funded by Caring for our Country, NSW Office of Environment and Heritage and
Natural Resource Management regions, monitors atmospheric dust levels at 40 stations across
Australia. Figure 2 shows many paddocks with low ground cover (the red and orange pixels) upwind of
stations in north-west Victoria and south-west New South Wales that recorded dust.
Comparing observations of dust with measurements of bare ground for each month and year is also
helping the NSW Catchment Management Authorities to determine thresholds for ground cover and set
Monthly maps from the MODIS satellite of areas with more than 50 per cent bare ground are also being
used in the national wind erosion model (CEMSYS) see dustwatch.edu.au to identify where erosion may

Ground cover is the fraction of living and dry or dead vegetation covering the soil surface, shown as a
percentage. Ground not covered by living and dry or dead vegetation is scored as bare ground. Climate
The remote sensing method chosen for this project provides estimates of the area of dry or dead
vegetation, which, like living vegetation, protects soil from wind and water erosion. These results give
better estimates of the area at risk of wind and water erosion than previously possible.
Ground cover is one of the recently announced National Sustainability Indicators for Australia. The
project described in this fact sheet will provide information on trends in ground cover for the National
Ground cover and rainfall deciles for February and September 2001, 2005 and 2011. Areas with less
Source: Mean monthly ground cover (ABARES, DAFF); annual rainfall deciles (Bureau of Meteorology).

Hours of dust with average hourly concentration greater than 25 mg/m3 for particle size less than 10
micrometers (figures in parenthesis and size of circles) at each DustWatch station and fractional bare
Source: Modified from New South Wales Office of Environment and Heritage DustWatch report
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/farm-food-drought/natural-resources/soils/monitoring/ground-