STRENGTHENING INDONESIA'S VETERINARY 
SERVICES 
 
 
 
AUSTRALIA INDONESIA PARTNERSHIP FOR EMERGING 
INFECTIOUS DISEASES 
ACHIEVEMENTS OF THE AIP-EID ANIMAL HEALTH PROGRAM 2011-2015

Page 2 of 28 
Contents 
Foreword ............................................................................................................ 3 
Indonesian Ministry of Agriculture .................................................................... 3 
Australian Department of Agriculture ................................................................ 4 
About the AIP-EID Animal Health Program ........................................................ 5 
Strengthening veterinary services .................................................................... 5 
Guiding principles: partnership & sustainability .................................................. 7 
Preventing and Responding to Animal Disease Emergencies .............................. 8 
Regulations, policies and guidelines for emergency response ............................... 8 
Capacity to anticipate, identify and assess threats .............................................. 8 
Simulation exercises ....................................................................................... 9 
Integrated Planning and Delivery of Disease Control Programs ....................... 11 
Regulations and integrated plans .................................................................... 11 
Budgeting, planning and advocacy .................................................................. 12 
Surveillance systems and capacity to detect disease ......................................... 13 
Laboratory support ....................................................................................... 13 
Assessment of risk pathways and operational risk ............................................ 14 
Investigation of routine disease events ........................................................... 14 
Leadership and management ......................................................................... 15 
Information: Effective Systems and Use........................................................... 17 
Improving access to animal health information ................................................ 17 
Using information to enhance veterinary service performance ............................ 20 
Strengthening human resources through technical training ................................ 21 
The Role of National Reference Laboratories.................................................... 23 
Enhancing diagnostic test methods ................................................................. 23 
Ensuring high-quality diagnostic test results .................................................... 23 
Key Results ...................................................................................................... 25 
Opportunities for the Future ............................................................................ 27

AIP-EID Animal Health Program 2011-2015 
Page 3 of 28 
Foreword 
Indonesian Ministry of Agriculture 
 
Ir. Syukur Iwantoro MS. MBA. 
Director General of Livestock and Animal Health Services 
The Australia Indonesia Partnership for Emerging Infectious Diseases (AIP-EID) 2011-2015 is a 
bilateral government-to-government partnership that has proven to be mutually beneficial for 
both countries. Indonesia and Australia are both keenly aware of the importance of 
strengthening the delivery of veterinary services. The AIP-EID Program focuses on combating 
threats of the incursion of disease, whether endemic and/or newly emerging, or diseases that 
have the potential to create a pandemic. The rate of such diseases has grown significantly in 
the last few decades, especially in the case of those that are zoonotic in nature. 
The AIP-EID Program offers technical assistance in the area of human resource capacity-
building, as piloted in the provinces of South Sulawesi and West Sulawesi. This technical 
assistance has been clearly beneficial for Indonesia and its veterinary services, which still 
require strengthening in terms of human resources, laboratory networks, disease surveillance 
and investigation capacity, quarantine systems, and a coordination system between the central 
and field offices for managing emergency disease outbreaks. 
During the course of the AIP-EID Program, we have seen several achievements leading to a 
monumental outcome that brings together elements of strategic planning, coordination, 
technical capacity and management of animal diseases. This has strengthened capacity to 
prevent the incursion of diseases, and to stay alert and respond to emergency situations. Under 
the Program, we have seen the development of disease control programs at the sub-national 
level, the establishment of an integrated animal health information system (iSIKHNAS) and the 
strengthening of national laboratories as integral components of a greater laboratory network. 
We would like to express our appreciation to the Australian Government through the 
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT) for the grants given to Indonesia in the effort 
to combat animal diseases, especially the infectious animal diseases that are priorities for the 
Government of Indonesia. We would also like to extend our thanks to the Australian 
Department of Agriculture, as well as all personnel from the AIP-EID Program, the provincial 
governments of South Sulawesi and West Sulawesi, and all those who assisted in ensuring the 
success of the program. 
We hope that the partnership will continue in the future, with a focus on the concept of One 
World, One Health, in order to provide mutual benefit to both Indonesia and Australia, as well 
as contribute to food security and the health of humans, animals and the environment.

AIP-EID Animal Health Program 2011-2015 
Page 4 of 28 
Australian Department of Agriculture 
 
Rona Mellor PSM 
Deputy Secretary 
Department of Agriculture 
It is with pleasure that I present this report on the achievements of the Australia Indonesia 
Partnership for Emerging Infectious Diseases (AIP-EID) Animal Health Program. The program's 
work over the past four years has made a substantial contribution to strengthening Indonesia's 
veterinary services. 
Australia and Indonesia have a long history of collaboration in the area of animal health and the 
control of infectious diseases. During the 1970s and 1980s, this collaborative partnership 
contributed to the eradication of foot and mouth disease (FMD) from Indonesia. Since then, 
much has been achieved through technical partnerships involving the governments and 
academic institutions of both countries. 
As we move forward in the 21st century, infectious diseases continue to pose a serious threat. 
The factors that favour the emergence of infectious diseases are plentiful and globalisation 
creates opportunities for diseases to spread with frightening speed. Meanwhile, economic 
growth is leading to greater demand for animal protein and other livestock products. The role of 
veterinary services is becoming ever more important for protecting our health and prosperity. 
This report outlines advances that have been made under the AIP-EID program in many areas 
of Indonesia's veterinary services, such as disease prevention and emergency response; 
planning and implementation of disease control programs; information systems and laboratory 
capacity. Positive changes have been made through a genuine and effective partnership, and it 
is encouraging to see that steps have already been taken to ensure the sustainability of these 
changes. 
None of these outcomes would have been attained without a strong commitment to improving 
animal health, for the good of people in Australia, Indonesia and the wider region. The 
Australian Government sincerely appreciates the ongoing collaborative partnership with the 
Government of Indonesia and commends the work of all those involved in the implementation 
of the AIP-EID program. 
It is my hope that many people will benefit from the outcomes of the AIP-EID program. A 
strong animal health system in Indonesia not only serves the farmers and rural communities of 
Indonesia, but also helps to protect the health and prosperity of communities throughout the 
region.

AIP-EID Animal Health Program 2011-2015 
Page 5 of 28 
About the AIP-EID Animal Health Program 
Strengthening veterinary services 
Australia and Indonesia recognise the importance of strong veterinary services to 
combat emerging infectious diseases. Diseases such as highly pathogenic avian 
influenza, brucellosis, anthrax and rabies threaten food security, rural livelihoods and 
public health. There is much to be gained from bilateral and regional collaboration to 
mitigate the threat of disease epidemics and their associated social and economic 
costs. 
The AIP-EID Animal Health Program was implemented from 2011 to 2015 in partnership by the 
Australian Government Department of Agriculture and the Indonesian Ministry of Agriculture. 
The AUD 22 million program strengthened Indonesia's veterinary services across a range of 
technical and policy areas, at both central and sub-national levels. 
Indonesia's veterinary services are now better able to prevent, detect and control emerging and 
important endemic infectious diseases. The AIP-EID program worked to strengthen animal 
health institutions and the capabilities of government staff to deliver veterinary services. 
Program outcomes were developed to align with the priorities of the Government of Indonesia 
and followed on from the World Animal Health Organisation (OIE) Performance of Veterinary 
Services (PVS) assessment missions. 
 
The program had a broad scope covering five inter-related areas. At the national level, the 
program set out to develop sound policies with the necessary supporting regulations and 
technical guidelines for emergency preparedness and response, as well as disease prevention 
and control. Core capabilities of veterinary services were strengthened in the areas of 
information systems, animal health laboratories and quarantine operations. At the sub-national 
level, training in animal health and non-technical areas such as planning and advocacy was 
delivered in tandem with support for local disease control programs.

AIP-EID Animal Health Program 2011-2015 
Page 6 of 28 
 
The AIP-EID program was delivered in the true spirit of partnership, and with a focus on 
strengthening sustainable systems. Australian technical experts from the Department of 
Agriculture worked closely with counterparts in the Indonesian Directorate of Livestock and 
Animal Health Services (DGLAHS), the Indonesian Agricultural Quarantine Agency (IAQA) and 
diagnostic laboratories throughout Indonesia. At the sub-national level, the program 
implemented a series of pilot projects in the provinces of South Sulawesi and West Sulawesi. 
The Australian Animal Health Laboratory (AAHL) made a strong contribution to the 
strengthening of diagnostic laboratories.

AIP-EID Animal Health Program 2011-2015 
Page 7 of 28 
 
Guiding principles: partnership & sustainability 
Partnership and sustainability were core principles of the AIP-EID program. The program was 
delivered entirely within the Indonesian Government framework and with a strong focus on the 
sustainable improvement of government veterinary services. A shared responsibility for design 
and monitoring helped to ensure that the program was aligned with Indonesia's priorities. 
Australian advisers worked on a day-to-day basis with their Indonesian counterparts to facilitate 
knowledge transfer and ensure that program interventions were appropriate and scalable in the 
Indonesian context. 
 
Health and Livelihoods 
A large proportion of cattle in Indonesia are raised by small-holder farmers. Better control of 
infectious diseases improves animal production and the livelihoods of people in rural 
communities.

AIP-EID Animal Health Program 2011-2015 
Page 8 of 28 
Preventing and Responding to Animal Disease Emergencies 
When outbreaks of disease occur, the social and economic impacts can be very high. 
These impacts can be avoided or greatly reduced if systems are in place to prevent or 
rapidly respond to animal disease emergencies. 
Regulations, policies and guidelines for emergency response 
The AIP-EID program supported the development of a series of regulations, policies, guidelines 
and standard operating procedures (SOPs) to underpin the emergency response to disease 
outbreaks. Government staff were closely involved in this work, leading to improved 
understanding, greater capacity and stronger commitment to implement a more effective 
emergency management system. 
 
Capacity to anticipate, identify and assess threats 
The likelihood of disease incursions can be greatly reduced if threats are identified early, are 
rapidly assessed, and steps are quickly taken to manage the risks. Guidelines on the 
assessment of risks associated with the movement of animals and animal products were 
developed and tested in the field during the course of the program. These were complemented 
by the development of a training course on operational (applied) risk assessment for officers in 
the areas of quarantine and animal health. Protocols on scanning for emerging disease threats 
using various information sources were developed in tandem with guidelines and training on the 
rapid assessment of risks arising from overseas or domestically. 
Collaboration in developing these guidelines has resulted in improved coordination between 
animal health, quarantine and veterinary public health personnel, as well as greater 
understanding between policy makers and field staff.

AIP-EID Animal Health Program 2011-2015 
Page 9 of 28 
 
 
 
 
"Rapid risk assessment guidelines and scanning protocols have been tested and we have 
positive feedback on all elements. The guidelines are easy to implement and have been well 
understood by field officers around Surabaya, Malang and Manado." 
Veterinary Officer, Directorate of Animal Health 
Simulation exercises 
Disease outbreak simulation exercises are an important part of preparedness and contribute to 
the ongoing refinement of emergency response systems. A manual on simulation exercises has 
been developed by the program and used each year in the planning, delivery and review of 
foot-and-mouth disease (FMD) exercises. In 2014, additional exercises were conducted to 
assess preparedness for a rabies outbreak, and to review the process of submission and testing 
of field samples to a diagnostic laboratory. The training and experience gained through 
simulation exercises support ongoing efforts to strengthen coordination and overall emergency 
response capability.

AIP-EID Animal Health Program 2011-2015 
Page 10 of 28 
More than 450 representatives from national and sub-national agencies participated in the FMD 
simulation exercises from 2011 to 2014. These exercises resulted in a greater awareness of the 
need for a clear organisational structure, with defined agency and staff roles and 
responsibilities, to enable a rapid and coordinated whole-of-government response to disease 
emergencies. 
Findings and recommendations from the simulation exercises have informed the development of 
an emergency management manual, which will guide further development of an integrated 
emergency management system. 
"Through simulation exercises, coordination between related units has been improved. There 
was intense communication and effective coordination when a suspected FMD case was 
detected recently in Bone District. We were successful in launching a quick and effective 
response." 
Head of Provincial Livestock and Animal Health Office, South Sulawesi 
 
Zoonotic Diseases 
such as bird flu, anthrax and brucellosis reduce animal production and directly threaten human 
health.

AIP-EID Animal Health Program 2011-2015 
Page 11 of 28 
Integrated Planning and Delivery of Disease Control 
Programs 
The broad scope of the program covered a range of policy, systems and human 
resource capacities at the national and sub-national level. This enabled an integrated 
approach to the planning and delivery of disease control programs. The control of 
brucellosis in three pilot districts was a particular focus in developing coordinated 
disease control policies and plans, though all interventions were designed to build 
essential management and technical capacities that can be applied to all disease 
control programs. 
A number of elements of the veterinary services are required to effectively prevent and control 
disease. Elements include regulations, policies, plans, management and coordination structures, 
human resources and funding. The program worked to strengthen each of these elements and 
contribute to better and more integrated planning and delivery of animal disease control 
programs. This schematic highlights how the AIP-EID program worked holistically across 
different elements of the veterinary service at the national and subnational levels of 
government. 
 
Regulations and integrated plans 
Coherent plans for the progressive control and eradication of brucellosis have been developed at 
the national, provincial and district level with support from laboratory and quarantine services. 
These plans are guiding local control programs which are now being implemented in three 
districts in South Sulawesi (Barru, Enrekang and Pinrang). The plans promote a technically 
sound and integrated approach to disease control; they have also been used as a basis for 
advocating for increases to budgets and resources. A national roadmap has since been 
developed for the control of Classical Swine Fever.

AIP-EID Animal Health Program 2011-2015 
Page 12 of 28 
"Before we received training and were J involved in brucellosis control plan activities, we didn't 
use a consistent sampling method. We have also gained other knowledge from our involvement 
in the AIP-EID program. Now we are very optimistic that the cattle population in Pinrang District 
will increase and become healthier in the coming years" 
Head of Pinrang District Animal Health Service, South Sulawesi 
Budgeting, planning and advocacy 
The delivery of effective veterinary services requires funding and the efficient use of limited 
resources. This means that veterinary service personnel must be able to develop plans and 
budgets, and advocate for appropriate funding. During the course of the program, a training 
course on budgeting and planning was delivered to 477 participants in South Sulawesi and West 
Sulawesi. Personnel there are now able to develop operational plans and budgets that are more 
closely linked to strategic objectives. In districts where training has been provided, the budget 
allocation for animal health has increased and there has been more effective and efficient use of 
the available resources.

AIP-EID Animal Health Program 2011-2015 
Page 13 of 28 
 
"We used to have difficulty in contacting BAPPEDA (the Regional Development Planning 
Agency), but as a result of the training in budgeting provided by the AIP-EID program, we are 
now developing better proposals and our engagement with BAPPEDA has improved 
significantly." 
District Veterinarian, South Sulawesi 
Surveillance systems and capacity to detect disease 
Surveillance to detect disease events is a cornerstone of disease control. Under the AIP-EID 
program, comprehensive guidelines on animal health surveillance were published and 
distributed nationally, together with a supporting poster. A three-day course on surveillance 
was developed to complement the guidelines. The guidelines and training encouraged the 
adoption of a range of measures to improve the efficiency and sensitivity of surveillance for 
animal diseases. The guidelines have been used to review early detection and surveillance 
programs for FMD, brucellosis and other diseases. 
The establishment of an integrated national animal health information system known as 
iSIKHNAS has allowed simple and real-time communication between farmers or voluntary 
participants known as 'village reporters' and the local animal health post. In order to harness 
the power of the community in reporting disease events, the program developed a short course 
for voluntary village reporters on how to recognise signs of poor health and report them using 
iSIKHNAS. In districts where village reporters have been trained, better communication and 
faster responses have strengthened the relationship between the community and veterinary 
service personnel. 
Laboratory support 
Animal health laboratories play an important role in diagnosing diseases and supporting disease 
control programs. With regional Disease Investigation Centres and provincial laboratories, the

AIP-EID Animal Health Program 2011-2015 
Page 14 of 28 
AIP-EID program worked to harmonise test methods and establish quality assurance processes. 
Achievements in strengthening the laboratory network are described in detail later in this 
report. 
Assessment of risk pathways and operational risk 
The prevention of disease incursions is an important element of disease control. Animals and 
animal products are often moved in the course of production and marketing, and this can result 
in the spread of disease. Under the program, guidelines to assess risk pathways were developed 
to encourage a methodical and proactive approach to risk management, and to strengthen 
collaboration between central government, local government and industry stakeholders. 
A training course in operational (applied) risk assessment was developed to enable animal 
health and quarantine officers at the field level to better identify and manage the risks 
associated with animal movements. The training has been modified as an E-learning package to 
increase its accessibility. 
 
Investigation of routine disease events 
Investigation of routine disease events is one of the primary roles of field veterinarian and para-
veterinarians. Such investigations form the basis of diagnosis and treatment, and are an 
essential service provided by veterinary services to farmers. 
The program developed training modules in disease investigation that were delivered to 45 
veterinarians and 376 para-veterinarians in South Sulawesi and West Sulawesi. As a result of 
the training, field staff developed a more methodical and systematic approach to disease 
investigation. They are now more confident of their technical skills and are more motivated to 
respond to routine disease notifications. 
In the pilot districts where disease investigation training was delivered, farmers are now 
receiving a better service because of more rapid responses, better communication and more 
effective disease investigation. This is helping to build stronger relationships between veterinary 
authorities and the communities they serve. 
Government staff were integral to the development and delivery of the training. Training 
materials and capacity now exist to enable replication in other areas.

AIP-EID Animal Health Program 2011-2015 
Page 15 of 28 
Leadership and management 
 
Veterinary Leadership is now recognised internationally as a critical requirement of any 
veterinary service. Under the AIP-EID program, one core activity was the delivery of veterinary 
leadership training to next generation leaders. More than 50 young managers from Indonesia's 
veterinary services have now completed the Indonesia Veterinary Leadership (IVL) course. 
 
The IVL course was developed by the Bogor Agriculture University (IPB) and the University of 
Gadjah Mada (UGM) in collaboration with the University of Sydney. The core Indonesian trainers 
have now developed the skills and abilities to deliver dynamic, experiential training in veterinary 
leadership. The course developed the critical, non-technical skills necessary for good leadership. 
It covered personal leadership, leading others and organisational leadership, with modules on 
topics such as individual differences, ethics, career-building, time and change management and 
team building. 
"The mental revolution initiated by IVL will build the institutional culture needed to strengthen 
veterinary services." 
Sub-directorate head, Directorate of Animal Health 
"I have learnt a lot from the IVL. I feel like I am 'reborn' to be not only a better person but also 
a better leader. This has been a good experience" 
Section Head, Animal Health and Veterinary Public Health, West Sulawesi 
Government veterinary middle managers have increased confidence and competence in 
leadership and are challenging leadership paradigms. This is most clearly seen in the 
management of their day-to-day tasks, which is showing improved scheduling and prioritisation.

AIP-EID Animal Health Program 2011-2015 
Page 16 of 28 
They have also dramatically increased their engagement with senior managers and are driving 
changes in vision and policy. 
Veterinary Leadership has now been recognised by the Indonesian Veterinary Medical 
Association, which has been established the IVL Commission. The commission is developing a 
formal accreditation process and is guiding the extension of the IVL more broadly for senior 
managers, district veterinarians, postgraduate and undergraduate students. 
6,993 
government officers trained from 2011 to 2015 in technical areas related to animal health and 
non-technical areas such as veterinary leadership, planning and budgeting.

AIP-EID Animal Health Program 2011-2015 
Page 17 of 28 
Information: Effective Systems and Use 
 
Access to information underpins many aspects of the delivery of veterinary services. 
Field services, disease control programs, policy development and advocacy are all 
improved when there is ready access to quality information. Because of the central 
importance of information systems to veterinary service delivery, this was a key area 
of collaboration under the AIP-EID program. 
A comprehensive review of Indonesia's animal health information needs and capabilities was 
conducted in 2012. The review looked at the work being done at all levels of veterinary service 
to better understand the needs for information and the strengths and constraints of existing 
information systems. The review took into account organisational and technical elements, and 
the cultural and psychological factors that motivate or discourage people from contributing and 
using information. 
The review generated a detailed roadmap for the development of an integrated national animal 
health information system that became known as iSIKHNAS. Design, development and pilot 
projects took place from 2013 to 2014, followed by a first phase of national extension in late 
2014. In recognition of the benefits and demand from stakeholders at the local level, further 
national extension—funded and implemented by the Government of Indonesia—is underway in 
2015. 
Improving access to animal health information 
iSIKHNAS is Indonesia's integrated national animal health information system. It is a powerful 
and comprehensive information system that uses modern technology and a people-centred 
philosophy to support animal health and production. 
iSIKHNAS is based on strong principles and a philosophy that puts people at the heart of the 
system. The innovation and power of iSIKHNAS comes from its ability to provide immediate 
benefit to all users; for example, by making communication easier, removing menial and 
repetitive reporting tasks, and providing fast and positive feedback. 
With iSIKHNAS, modern technologies link existing databases and replace paper-based systems 
to create a very powerful and integrated information system. It is a comprehensive and flexible 
system that manages a large and rapidly growing number of information types including disease 
notifications, laboratory test results, surveillance and vaccination programs, animal movements 
and animal identification. It allows users to contribute and extract information easily and in real 
time, using SMS, instant messaging, email and the internet. The powerful iSIKHNAS database 
automatically generates reports, graphs and maps and sends these to the people who need 
them. Importantly, iSIKHNAS is built on open-source software and works with existing ICT 
infrastructure. 
Key features of iSIKHNAS 
 
Simple: uses existing tools such as SMS, spreadsheets, internet and email. 
 
Integrated: a single system for all relevant data. 
 
Fast: data submission from the field to the database is direct and electronic.

AIP-EID Animal Health Program 2011-2015 
Page 18 of 28 
 
Win-win for data users: data is captured electronically in the field making field work 
easier; data is readily available at higher levels for policy and decision-making. 
 
Provides a service to all: gives direct benefit to farmers and their communities, 
improves communication for animal health staff at all levels and makes reporting faster 
and easier. 
 
Sustainable: developed to be managed and adapted by Indonesian Government staff. 
 
How the system works 
Data types managed: 
 
Field disease reporting 
 
Laboratory data  identification 
 
Slaughter statistics 
 
Active surveillance 
 
Breeding management 
 
Livestock movement 
 
Population data 
 
Vaccination programs 
 
Animal

AIP-EID Animal Health Program 2011-2015 
Page 19 of 28

AIP-EID Animal Health Program 2011-2015 
Page 20 of 28 
Average Daily Number of SMS messages received by the iSIKHNAS Database, by 
Month 
 
People are the most important element of any information system and the program has 
invested heavily in the development of iSIKHNAS 'Champions' and coordinators at all levels of 
government. 
As of May 2015, iSIKHNAS is being used by almost 5000 people in 382 districts across 33 
provinces. In excess of 1000 SMS messages are received by the iSIKHNAS database each day 
and more than 300 people log in to the iSIKHNAS website each day to view over 200 
automatically generated reports, graphs and maps. 
Using information to enhance veterinary service performance 
 
The establishment of iSIKHNAS has enabled people to communicate more easily and engage 
with information more effectively in the course of their daily work. As intended, this has 
resulted in stronger linkages between veterinary service staff and the farmers and communities 
they serve. Decision-makers are now using information from iSIKHNAS to plan and implement 
disease control programs, monitor the performance of staff, allocate resources more efficiently 
and advocate for the provision of animal health services. Information is more readily accessible 
and people are becoming more motivated to use it on a daily basis. 
To further promote the effective use of information, the program developed a suite of training 
courses for veterinarians and para-veterinary staff. Each training 'package' includes 
comprehensive materials for facilitators and participants—all are freely accessible at 
wiki.iSIKHNAS.com

AIP-EID Animal Health Program 2011-2015 
Page 21 of 28 
By May 2015, 277 people had received training in topics such as field epidemiology, 
surveillance, data analysis and Geographic Information Systems. Several of these courses have 
already been replicated by the Government of Indonesia at the central and sub-national level, 
resulting in more trained staff. 
 
Strengthening human resources through technical training 
 
People with the right knowledge, skills and attitudes are an essential element of veterinary 
services. Providing training to enhance human resources is not easy, particularly when the 
target is several thousand field officers dispersed across rural Indonesia. The task becomes 
almost impossible when training is expensive or requires 'expert' trainers. 
The AIP-EID program took a fresh approach to the training of field staff, inspired by a saying 
from advertising: 'Content is king but distribution is almighty'. The content of the training was 
designed to provide relevant and widely applicable technical material, using methods that 
support adult learning. To enable distribution (replication) across Indonesia, the courses were 
designed to be delivered by competent facilitators who are not necessarily experts. 
Presentations, videos, E-learning materials and comprehensive resources for facilitators and 
participants were made freely accessible, making it easier for the courses to be replicated at low 
cost, wherever and whenever people were motivated to learn.

AIP-EID Animal Health Program 2011-2015 
Page 22 of 28 
Over time, it is hoped that these training courses will continue to be used widely and encourage 
a culture of ongoing professional development that can be done in 'everyday' settings without a 
lot of time, money or specialist expertise. 
Vet Service Personnel 
are using information from iSIKHNAS to support planning, decision making, advocacy and the 
delivery of field services. They are more motivated to access information and make evidence-
based decisions.

AIP-EID Animal Health Program 2011-2015 
Page 23 of 28 
The Role of National Reference Laboratories 
Indonesia has eight regional Diseases Investigation Centres and a network of 
laboratories serving animal health, veterinary public health and quarantine. These 
laboratories provide diagnostic services that underpin many elements of diseases 
control. 
With a focus on national reference laboratories, the AIP-EID program supported the 
advancement of diagnostic test methods for several high-priority diseases, and the 
establishment of processes to assure the quality of test results. 
Enhancing diagnostic test methods 
The program worked with national reference laboratories to embed standard test methods for 
the diagnosis of brucellosis, anthrax, avian influenza and rabies. Personnel from many other 
laboratories attended training, and standard methods are now being used more routinely across 
the country. The standard methods have strengthened diagnostic capacity for these four 
zoonotic diseases (animal diseases that can spread to humans) and can also be applied to the 
diagnostic testing of other viral and bacterial diseases. 
At the Disease Investigation Centre in Bukittinggi, West Sumatra, a new test method was 
developed for the diagnosis of rabies. The Rabies Immunoperoxidase Antigen Detection (RIAD) 
test performs as well as the 'gold standard' Fluorescent Antibody Test (FAT), but unlike the FAT, 
it can be performed without an expensive fluorescent microscope. RIAD test kits are now being 
produced by the Bukittinggi laboratory and used in provincial laboratories to provide rapid and 
accurate diagnosis of one of the most important zoonotic diseases. 
Ensuring high-quality diagnostic test results 
Reference laboratories play an important role in establishing standards and maintaining the 
quality of diagnostic tests. This is vital for internal quality control and for quality assurance 
processes throughout the laboratory network. Since receiving training and mentoring through 
the AIP-EID program, reference laboratories have planned and implemented Proficiency Testing 
(PT) rounds for avian influenza, rabies and brucellosis. At the Disease Investigation Centre in 
Maros, South Sulawesi, the program supported the development of a standard serum for use in 
tests for brucellosis.

AIP-EID Animal Health Program 2011-2015 
Page 24 of 28 
National Reference laboratories 
 
 
The roles and functions of the designated reference laboratories have been better defined 
with the development of 19 key criteria adapted from the OIE. These allow laboratories to 
better prioritise their work programs, and enable them to measure and track their 
performance. 
 
Several reference laboratories are now exercising their reference roles more actively, and 
providing technical support for other laboratories. They are developing new test methods, 
providing confirmatory diagnostic testing, and have become leaders in the establishment 
of quality assurance processes.

AIP-EID Animal Health Program 2011-2015 
Page 25 of 28 
Key Results

AIP-EID Animal Health Program 2011-2015 
Page 26 of 28

AIP-EID Animal Health Program 2011-2015 
Page 27 of 28 
Opportunities for the Future 
We all hope for a future where our health and livelihoods are protected against the danger of 
infectious disease. However, it is very likely that the strength and resilience of our public health 
and animal health systems will be tested in the face of various threats. Rapid changes in 
agricultural systems, demography and the environment will create new opportunities for germs 
that may alter the balance in the ongoing war against infectious diseases. Veterinary services 
will play an increasingly important role in securing a healthy and prosperous future. 
The AIP-EID Animal Health Program demonstrates that strong partnerships can substantially 
strengthen veterinary services. As outlined in this report, clear results were achieved in the four 
years from 2011 to 2015. In addition to the benefits realised during this period, opportunities 
were created that have great potential to further transform Indonesia's veterinary services. 
Even greater impact can be attained with sustained investment to capitalise on these 
achievements. National extension of iSIKHNAS and full utilisation of its existing capability will 
transform field service delivery and provide robust and accessible evidence to inform decisions, 
policies and programs. With relatively little investment, enhancements to iSIKHNAS could bring 
great value to veterinary public health, quarantine and public health. There are already strong 
foundations and a firm commitment to develop a robust emergency management system, and 
tremendous demand for leadership training. 
Whatever the future holds, animals will remain integral to our societies and economies. As new 
diseases continue to emerge, our health remains inextricably linked to the health of animals and 
the environment. Stronger health systems— both for animal health and for human health— will 
deliver local benefits and contribute to an important global public good. 
Veterinary services will become more important than ever, and there will a growing need for 
collaboration across agencies, sectors and disciplines, and among countries with common goals 
and interests. Together, we can shape our future for the betterment of animal health and our 
health. 
'Animal Health, Our Health'

AIP-EID Animal Health Program 2011-2015 
Page 28 of 28 
 
Secretariat of the AIP-EID Animal Health Program 
Tel: 62-21-780 2119 / 781 5580 
Fax: 62-21-780 5238 / 781 5581 
Email: sekretariat@aipeid.org