The implementation review assesses the extent to which the requirements of the 2018 Commonwealth Fisheries Harvest Strategy Policy and Bycatch Policy have been met.
Published 8 November 2024
This report provides a synthesis of management arrangements, catch and sustainability of sharks across Australia. This report is a commitment under the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation's International Plan of Action for the Conservation and Management of Sharks and Australia's National Plan of Action for the Conservation and Management of Sharks.
Published 18 July 2024
This report supports the review of the Southern Squid Jig Fishery harvest strategy and provides a description of the available data and recommendations for future data collection that would enable more fulsome implementation of the harvest strategy through more robust catch per unit effort (CPUE) and depletion analyses.
Published 20 May 2024
For the Gillnet, Hook and Trap fishery and Eastern Tuna and Billfish fishery, these reports assess the similarity between electronic monitoring (cameras) and fishers own reported logbook data.
Published 19 May 2023
The Australian Government and FRDC have funded the National Social and Economic Survey of Recreational Fishers. This research as been conducted in collaboration with ABARES, the University of Canberra (UC) and BDO EconSearch and will be hosted on the FRDC website. This includes the survey’s findings executive summary and technical paper.
Another output of the national recreational fishing survey was a National Recreational Fishing Bait & Berley survey
Published 21 February 2023
The survey described in this report is the first comprehensive assessment of the recreational harvest of Southern Bluefin Tuna in Australia. The methodology was developed by ABARES and the University of Tasmania, and the survey was internationally peer-reviewed.
Published 28 May 2020.
This report is a literature review of methods used for resource sharing of fish stocks between commercial and recreational fishers in Australia and around the world. The main finding of the literature review is that in Australia, the United States, Canada, New Zealand and Japan, resource allocation decisions are made on a case by case basis and involve various levels of advisory panels of experts and extensive consultations with industry representatives. There is no simple formula or method that can be employed to solve resource sharing problems.
Published: 26 May 2020
This report provides a synthesis of management arrangements, catch and sustainability of sharks across Australia. This report is a commitment under the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation's International Plan of Action for the Conservation and Management of Sharks and Australia's National Plan of Action for the Conservation and Management of Sharks.
Published: 16 November 2018
This report analyses public sentiment on the protection of the Australian environment from the impacts of new exotic marine pests. It shows that Australians place significant value on the health of the marine environment.
Published: 24 April 2018
This paper presents empirical results of a choice modelling application conducted to estimate the economic value the Australian public places on reducing the chance of new marine pest incursions into Australia.
Published: 24 April 2018
The Government commissioned an independent review of the Commonwealth Marine Reserves that were originally proclaimed in November 2012. The Department of the Environment commissioned ABARES to assess potential displacement of commercial fishing by alternative marine reserve designs and zoning options considered by the Bioregional Advisory Panel. This report details potential displacement by the network proclaimed in 2012 and the network recommended by the Panel in 2015.
Published: 12 September 2016
Australian Commonwealth fisheries are managed with the objective of maximising economic returns to the Australian community - an objective that may be served by increasing the efficiency of the fishing fleet. This paper presents a stochastic frontier analysis (SFA) of the Commonwealth Trawl Sector (CTS) of the Southern and Eastern Scalefish and Shark Fishery. ABARES used boat-level data to explore the potential of the SFA approach to determine the efficiency of the fleet and find reasons for any inefficiencies.
Published: 3 February 2016
Australian Commonwealth fisheries are managed with the objective of maximising economic returns to the Australian community - an objective that may be served by increasing the efficiency of the fishing fleet. This paper presents a stochastic frontier analysis (SFA) of the Commonwealth Trawl Sector (CTS) of the Southern and Eastern Scalefish and Shark Fishery. ABARES used boat-level data to explore the potential of the SFA approach to determine the efficiency of the fleet and find reasons for any inefficiencies.
Published: 3 February 2016
A key objective of the Australian Government's Policy for a More Competitive and Sustainable Fisheries Sector is to conduct national recreational fishing surveys every five years. This report presents a cost-effective and repeatable framework for these surveys.
Published: 18 November 2015
The Reducing Uncertainty in Stock Status project was part of an expanded research programme to classify Commonwealth-managed species that were classified as uncertain. This report presents a series of stock assessments that were undertaken for species and species groups, particularly in smaller and lower-value Commonwealth fisheries during the RUSS project. A weight-of-evidence framework for determining stock status from a structured review of scientific evidence and interpretation of indicators is also presented.
Published: 11 September 2015
The report develops a framework that can be used to assist managers to cost effectively develop target reference points that are consistent with the Commonwealth Harvest Strategy Policy for multispecies in mixed fisheries. The report addresses the problem of determining appropriate target reference points for target and by-product stocks in multispecies fisheries. The applicability of this framework is demonstrated using a case study fishery, the trawl component of the Southern and Eastern Scalefish and Shark Fishery.
Published: 18 June 2015
These information sheets provide statistics and trends in employment participation and workforce demographics. There is no 'typical' picture of someone engaged or employed in our primary industries. The Australian agricultural, fisheries and forestry workforce is made up of a diverse range of people of varying ages, genders, cultural backgrounds who contribute significantly to these primary industries. In addition to being an important source of labour, women, youth, Indigenous and culturally and linguistically diverse people have been fundamental to the sustainability, competiveness and productivity of primary industries in Australia over many years.
Published: 20 February 2015
The Status of key Australian fish stocks reports 2014 provide national assessments of the status of key wild-capture fish stocks. The reports provide scientifically based stock status assessments for 68 key species (or species complexes), which cumulatively contribute over 90 percent of the value and 85 percent of the volume from Australian fisheries. The reports were developed collaboratively ABARES, the Fisheries Research and Development Corporation (FRDC) and government fishery research agencies from all states, the Northern Territory and the CSIRO.
Published: 10 December 2014
The Productivity Analysis of Key Commonwealth Fisheries report is a publication that provides an indication of productivity trends for the Commonwealth's most valuable commercial fisheries. These trends reflect how well these fisheries use inputs to produce outputs. When viewed over time, productivity trends can assist in the evaluation of a fishery's economic performance. Productivity trends generally reflect changes in the fishery's operating environment. For example, in recent years a number of factors are likely to have altered total factor productivity trends of key Commonwealth fisheries. These changes include the Securing our Fishing Future (SOFF) structural adjustment package for Commonwealth fisheries which concluded in 2006-07, the implementation of the Commonwealth Harvest Strategy policy (HSP) in 2007, and the subsequent management changes required by the Australian Fisheries Management Authority (AFMA) to ensure sustainable and profitable fisheries. In recent years, fisheries have also faced adverse changes in market conditions, including adapting to high fuel prices and a high Australian dollar exchange rate.
Published: 6 December 2013
This study identified shark species of interest to the Australian Government using information from several sources. Recreational shark fishing activities were identified from literature searches, databases and discussions with fishery scientists, managers and recreational anglers. A catalogue of 35 databases was compiled from literature searches and metadata on databases. The catalogue compiled by this study provides the first central source of information on data pertaining specifically to Australian recreational catches of sharks. The databases are described and evaluated in terms of their spatial and temporal resolution, data collection methods, data elements and uncertainties. This provides a guide to locating data, determining the suitability of those data for further analysis and key information gaps.
Published: 26 September 2013
This report reviews the operationalisation of the harvest strategy policy's maximum economic yield objective across Commonwealth fisheries. The report provides an outline of key economic definitions and concepts as well as the general experiences and challenges of operationalising MEY in Commonwealth fisheries. It then draws on the literature to list the potential options that are available to improve the way in which Commonwealth fishery management meets the intent of the Commonwealth Fisheries Harvest Strategy Policy.
Published: 4 June 2013
This report reviews the operationalisation of the harvest strategy policy's maximum economic yield objective across Commonwealth fisheries. The report provides an outline of key economic definitions and concepts as well as the general experiences and challenges of operationalising MEY in Commonwealth fisheries. It then draws on the literature to list the potential options that are available to improve the way in which Commonwealth fishery management meets the intent of the Commonwealth Fisheries Harvest Strategy Policy.
Published: 28 May 2013
This technical overview was prepared for consideration by stakeholders and Australian Government agencies as part of the review of the Commonwealth Fisheries Harvest Strategy Policy and Guidelines. It summarises key conclusions and advice on potential improvements to technical aspects of the Commonwealth Harvest Strategy Policy (Department of Agriculture 2007) from the reports prepared on specific technical issues, providing a an interface between the technical detail in those reports and discussion of potential improvements to the harvest strategy policy and Implementation Guidelines.
Published: 28 May 2013
This paper uses an index number profit decomposition approach to examine recent drivers of change in profitability in two key Commonwealth prawn fisheries, the Northern Prawn Fishery and the Torres Strait Prawn Fishery. This approach allows for the drivers of profitability that can be influenced by a fishery manager (fish stocks and productivity) to be separated from those that cannot (output prices and input prices). The results reveal that a divergence in the economic performance of the two fisheries has been the result of differences in productivity trends. These differences are the likely result of differences in fishery management arrangements between the two fisheries.
Published: 7 February 2013
The total factor productivity indexes of five key Commonwealth fisheries have been developed using the Fisher index and ABARES survey data. Where fish stock biomass information is available, these indexes are also adjusted for changes in fish stocks. In trend terms, productivity increased over the last decade in most Commonwealth fisheries analysed. These increases reflect a mix of government induced structural adjustments and management changes as well as autonomous adjustment responses to market conditions.
Published: 7 February 2013