New plant export legislation commenced on 28 March 2021. The new export legislation consists of the Export Control Act 2020 and the Export Control Rules 2021. The Export Control (Plants and Plant Products) Rules 2021 (Plant Rules) set the specific requirements for the export of plants and plant products.
Under the old plant export legislation (pre-28 March 2021), there was a separate Norfolk Island Order for export of plants and plant products from Norfolk Island. This no longer exists under the new legislation.
The Plant Rules now cover exports of plants and plant products from Norfolk Island.
This change will not have any impact on Norfolk Island’s plant export industry. Exports of plants and plant products from Norfolk Island can continue as usual.
Under the Plant Rules, plants and plant products from Norfolk Island are non-prescribed goods. Therefore, prescribed export conditions and other legislative requirements such as the following do not apply:
- accredited properties
- registered establishments
- notice of intention to export
- trade descriptions
- export permits.
Importing countries sometimes require a phytosanitary certificate or other government certificate for Norfolk Island exporters. Phytosanitary certificates will continue to be issued where requested. As usual, they will be issued based on an inspection by an authorised officer and whether the consignment meets the import requirements of the intended destination country.
Updated government certificates and inspection records
Norfolk Island exporters must use the updated phytosanitary certificate template when requesting phytosanitary certification from an authorised officer. The updated template is available on our Certificates, declarations and forms webpage.
Norfolk Island authorised officers must use the updated manual inspection record template, which is available on the PEOM. This information is also available in the factsheet below.
| Document | Pages | File size | 
|---|---|---|
| Factsheet - Plant rules - Norfolk Island exporters DOCX | 2 | 298 KB | 
| Factsheet - Plant rules - Norfolk Island exporters PDF | 2 | 826 KB | 
If you have difficulty accessing these files, visit web accessibility for assistance.
Keep informed
Further information can be found in the PEOM, and at Improving Agricultural Export Legislation.
Contact us
Phone: +6723 22441
Email: norfolk.island@awe.gov.au