The 2007 equine influenza (horse flu) outbreak in Australia was a timely reminder of why biosecurity is both beneficial and necessary. Regardless of whether you own a large or small property, you are responsible for keeping your animals, plants/crops free from weeds, pests and disease.

This page provides on-farm biosecurity information that is relevant to hobby farmers through to large-scale producers. It provides a simple explanation of what biosecurity is, and how to keep weeds, pests and diseases off your property.

What is biosecurity?

Biosecurity is about protecting Australia’s people, animals, plants, and environment from pests and diseases. It includes trying to prevent new pests and diseases from arriving, and helping to control outbreaks when they do occur. While robust response arrangements are in place to combat outbreaks, preventing pest, disease and weed incursions in the first place, remains a national priority.

How you can protect your animals and plants from pests and diseases

Good biosecurity practises can help prevent pest and disease incursions, and invasive weeds establishing on your property. Biosecurity doesn't have to be complex or expensive to implement.

Resources

The Farm Biosecurity website offers a range of free on-farm biosecurity information and resources for hobby farmers, right through to those on large-scale farming enterprises. You can even create your own farm profile and resource toolkit based on the livestock and crops you have on your property.

Animal Biosecurity

- Avian influenza

- National Farm Biosecurity Manual - Poultry Production

- National Water Biosecurity Manual – Poultry Production

- Horse Venue Biosecurity Workbook

Livestock Biosecurity Network

Livestock Biosecurity Network officers provide livestock producers with tools and information to manage endemic and exotic diseases, as well as pest and weed incidents on their farms.

The LBN is an industry initiative established by the Cattle Council of Australia, Sheepmeat Council of Australia and Wool Producers Australia, and works in consultation with the Australian and state governments.

Plant Biosecurity

- Plate it. Don't plant it

- Biosecurity and farmers' markets

- Fruit Fly and the Home Gardner - preventfruitfly.com.au

Travelling Farm Workers

- Biosecurity for travelling farm workers (itinerant workers including fruit pickers, backpackers, farm contractors, and grey nomads)

Outbreaks

Report suspect pests, diseases and new weeds

Plant pests, diseases and new weeds must be reported to the Exotic Plant Pest Hotline on 1800 084 881.

Animal diseases (including aquatic) must be reported to the Emergency Animal Disease Hotline on1800 675 888.

Get the latest on pest and disease outbreaks

Visit outbreak.gov.au for the latest on national pest and disease eradication programs and information about how we respond to outbreaks.