Carbon on Country – A guide for NSW Aboriginal landholders and managers (New South Wales Government)

The New South Wales Government’s Carbon on Country (PDF 31 MB) guide for Aboriginal landholders and managers explains carbon farming, participating in carbon markets, conducting ACCU Scheme projects and sources of funding and support.

Fighting fire with fire (Clean Energy Regulator)

Fighting fire with fire explains a savanna burning project managed by the Nyaliga Aboriginal Corporation on 6,400 km2 of Country just southwest of Wyndham, Western Australia.

Jawoyn Fire Project (Jawoyn Association)

Savanna Burning

Savanna Burning, a 7:33 minute video (supported by NAILSMA, Live and Learn Environmental Education), overviews savanna burning to earn ACCUs. It includes animated diagrams explaining how ACCUs are created. It also explores the co-benefits of savanna burning by addressing, from an Indigenous perspective, the question, ‘Why would we want to be involved?’.

Carbon Farming Planning Guide (Western Australia Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development)

Case studies (Clean Energy Regulator)

ACCU Scheme case studies highlight different emissions reduction projects and show how each has benefitted participants.

Integrity in the Australian Carbon Market Explainer (Carbon Market Institute)

The Carbon Market Institute Integrity in the Australian Carbon Market Explainer (PDF 433 KB) factsheet overviews the ACCU Scheme and the checks and balances to ensure that ACCUs achieve environmental integrity, are only issued for abatement that has actually occurred and that abatement cannot be credited twice.

Mapping the Opportunities for Indigenous Carbon in Australia (Indigenous Carbon Industry Network)

The Indigenous Carbon Industry Network’s Mapping the Opportunities (PDF 7 MB) report provides First Nations carbon farming opportunities in Australia.

Arnhem Land Fire Abatement (Clean Energy Regulator)

The Arnhem Land Fire Abatement project is a savanna fire management project combining traditional Indigenous knowledge with modern technologies conducted under the ACCU Scheme.

Video – North Australia Savanna Fire Forum

2020 North Australia Savanna Fire Forum video, a 6:16 minute video, is from an event where some 320 people from across northern Australia, including Indigenous fire managers, government representatives, scientists and carbon businesses, gathered on Larrakia Country to discuss savanna fire management. Fire is central to Indigenous knowledge and culture. Right-way fire is an important tool for looking after Country, supporting biodiversity, reducing greenhouse gas emissions and renewing connections to cultural stories and traditional knowledge.

Video – Storing blue carbon (Clean Energy Regulator)

Watch the video (1:30 minutes) Storing blue carbon in our coastal ecosystems. This video describes the process of storing blue carbon in our coastal ecosystems and how ACCUs can be earned by doing so.