National Drought Agreement 2024 to 2029: Outcomes Reporting Framework

About the framework

The framework describes how the NDA will be monitored and reported on by the parties, as an intergovernmental agreement, and how parties will share learnings.

The framework:

outlines the ways that the parties will demonstrate how outcomes are achieved over the duration of the NDA

supports continuous improvement, and informs future priorities

ensures that the parties have a shared understanding of how outcomes will be monitored

provides transparency to non-party stakeholders.

The reporting will inform:

to what extent the parties achieved the outcomes listed in the NDA, and why or why not

what, if any, unintended outcomes resulted

what future priorities and opportunities exist through trends identified, lessons learned, or outcomes achieved.

Non-party stakeholders may also use this framework to understand the roles and responsibilities of the parties in reporting, and how the parties will demonstrate delivery of the NDA outcomes for the duration of the NDA.

Scope inclusions

Roles and responsibilities between and across jurisdictions

Reporting schedule

Indicators and measures to determine whether the NDA outcomes have been delivered

Opportunities and challenges for improvement and learning

Scope exclusions

Collective impact of drought initiatives, policies and programs

Individual government drought measures

The 2022 NDA review recommended that future efforts should not seek to measure or evaluate the collective impact of drought initiatives, given it would be unlikely to realise the benefits of this complex work. Doing so would also not align with the intent of the NDA, which is primarily focused on parties working together.

Responsibilities

The joint responsibilities contained within the NDA note the requirement of all parties to monitor drought policy and programs, to share information, to draw learnings, and endeavour to make these lessons learned public, where relevant.

The Commonwealth is responsible for coordinating monitoring, evaluation, learning and reporting efforts including the compilation and delivery of the NDA annual report, noting however that this requires input and involvement from all parties.

All parties are responsible for reviewing the effectiveness of individual programs and policies, contributing data towards reporting, and actively sharing lessons learned to improve clarity, decisions, and policy and programs.

What is needed to achieve the outcomes

Parties remain committed to working together for the timeframe of the NDA (2024 to 2029) and to make a positive difference towards management of drought in Australia.

Parties continue to share their policies and programs, and lessons learned with each other in the spirit of collaboration.

Parties provide adequate resourcing and funding to enable adherence to NDA principles.

Parties share replicable lessons.

Sufficient and accessible networks, forums, groups and platforms exist to enable effective sharing of information with non-party stakeholders.

Non-party stakeholders are motivated to access drought information, tools and lessons learned.

Table 1 Reporting framework

a Commonwealth to lead as Secretariat. All jurisdictions to contribute towards these data sources. AMM Agriculture Ministers’ Meeting. AGSOC Agriculture Senior Officials Committee.

Reporting schedule

As outlined in the NDA 2024 to 2029:

The parties will report against the outcomes of this agreement annually to the Agriculture Senior Officials Committee (AGSOC) and as agreed by all parties.

The AGSOC members, or their representatives, will discuss this agreement annually, or as agreed by all parties, to ensure effective and efficient execution of the agreement.

AGSOC will report annually to the Agriculture Ministers’ Meeting (AMM) and as required, on progress against the outcomes of this agreement.

Parties will produce an annual update to be publicly released by AMM, in line with the Outcomes Reporting Framework. Reporting will focus on progress against the outcomes of this agreement.

Table 2 Reporting schedule

a ‘Each year’ means yearly for the duration of the NDA 2024 to 2029. AMMWG Agriculture Ministers’ Meeting Working Group.

How learnings are shared and how they contribute to improvement

The parties will use information derived from reporting activities to monitor and determine progress against achieving the outcomes. The parties will also use it to inform continuous improvement in a variety of ways, including:

through the AMM Working Group on Drought – reviewing jurisdictional evaluations (where performed), observing trends, and sharing examples of lessons learned to inform work on policies and programs being developed across the jurisdictions

making replicable learnings public, where appropriate and relevant – for example, through the National Drought Network, or publishing information on websites

through formal NDA reporting including the NDA annual reports and the 2027 NDA review.

Acknowledgement of Country

We acknowledge the Traditional Custodians of Australia and their continuing connection to land and sea, waters, environment and community. We pay our respects to the Traditional Custodians of the lands we live and work on, their culture, and their Elders past and present.

© Commonwealth of Australia 2024

All material in this publication is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Licence except content supplied by third parties, logos and the Commonwealth Coat of Arms.