On 22 December 2025, the Australian Government announced the Mandatory Code of Conduct for Winegrape Purchases (mandatory Code).
The mandatory Code will help improve how winegrape growers and large winemakers do business together. It will set clear and consistent minimum standards for contracts, pricing and obligations of both parties.
It will also promote transparency and good-faith conduct and provide simple and accessible ways to resolve disputes. The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) will be responsible for supporting compliance and failure to deal in good faith may lead to penalties outlined under the Code.
The final code, to come into effect on 1 January 2027, will be developed in close consultation with winegrape growers and winemakers.
By introducing mandatory expectations for conduct, the code will strengthen the industry’s long-term sustainability and support grower viability.
Government response to the Emerson Review
Dr Craig Emerson’s Review of regulatory options for the wine and grape sector (the Emerson Review) investigated regulatory options to improve fair trading and competition in the grape and wine sector. The review proposed 14 recommendations aimed at supporting a more sustainable and balanced operating environment for growers and winemakers.
The Australian Government accepts the findings of the review and agrees with its primary recommendation to introduce a mandatory Code.
Winegrape Purchases Code of Conduct Advisory Group
In early March 2026, the Winegrape Purchases Code of Conduct Advisory Group (the Group) was established by the Australian Government to support the development of a mandatory Code.
The establishment of the Group marks an important step to help strengthen fairness and transparency across the winegrape supply chain.
It brings together representatives from across the wine and grape sector, including growers, winemakers and independent experts with experience in the voluntary code.
The Group will provide practical, evidence-based input into key elements of the mandatory code. This will include contract transparency, payment terms, dispute resolution and implementation arrangements.
Members will meet regularly throughout 2026 to support the development of a workable and balanced mandatory code.
The Group members include:
- Paul Derrico, CEO, Murray Valley Wine Growers
- Jeremy Cass, CEO, Riverina Winegrape Growers
- Amanda Dimas, Chair, Riverland Winegrape Growers Association
- Ashley Keegan, CEO, Food and Beverage Australia Limited
- Anthony Catanzariti, Director of Wine and Grape Sourcing, Treasury Wine Estates
- Brett McKinnon, Chief Technical Officer, Vinarchy
- Brigid Nolan, General Manager, The Wine Group
- Wayne Ellis, Industry Consultant, Ellis Castle Consulting
Have your say
The mandatory Code will be developed with input from the public and industry stakeholders.
A formal public consultation period will commence later in 2026.
Queries and feedback are welcome at: winepolicy@aff.gov.au.