__________________________________________________ 
Accord Australasia Limited ACN 117 659 168 ABN 83 205 141 267 
PO Box 290  BROADWAY  NSW  2007 
 
Tel:  61 2 9281 2322   Fax:  61 2 9281 0366   Website:  www.accord.asn.au  
Products for healthy living and a quality lifestyle 
Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals Legislation 
  Amendment (Operational Efficacy) Bill 2017 
Agvet Chemicals Branch 
Department of Agriculture and Water Resources 
GPO Box 858 
CANBERRA  ACT  2601 
 
Email: agvetreform@agriculture.gov.au 
 
 
Dear Madam/Sir 
 
 
Accord is pleased to provide comments on the Department’s efforts to improve the operational 
efficiency of the APVMA through its consultation on the Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals 
Legislation Amendment (Operational Efficiency) Bill 2017 (Draft Bill).  
 
Accord is the peak national industry association representing the manufacturers and 
marketers of formulated hygiene, cosmetic and specialty products, their raw material 
suppliers, and service providers.  Accord member companies make and/or market fast-moving 
consumer and commercial goods including hygiene, cosmetics and specialty products, 
sunscreens, food contact sanitisers, industrial and agricultural sanitisers, household 
pesticides, disinfectants and specialty commercial products.  Member companies include 
large global consumer product manufacturers as well as small dynamic Australian-owned 
businesses with 521 percent of members operating as SME (<200 employees).  A list of Accord 
member companies is available on our website: http://accord.asn.au/about/members. 
 
Approximately 232 percent of our members have dealings with the APVMA.  Most of which are 
small to medium enterprises operating in low margin businesses that are susceptible to input 
cost-pressures.  Products are either fast moving, low risk consumer goods or low risk, well 
characterised products which represent a low regulatory burden on the agvet sector and are 
not the core focus of the APVMA’s regulatory activities.   
 
Accord members have an interest in the efficient and effective operation of the APVMA in the 
administration of its legislation including implementation of reform initiatives.  As the ANAO 
audit3 found, there is room for improvement.  Accord has for many years been attempting to 
introduce reform to the regulation of dairy sanitisers.  Despite the APVMA receiving budget 
funding for reform to low risk products Accord has not seen anything meaningful by way of 
reform.  Accord was presented with a Draft of the Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals Code 
(Listed Chemical Product – Dairy sanitisers and cleansers) Standard in September 2016, but 
this fell far short of industry expectations for reform.   
 
The development of the Standard was not undertaken in consultation with industry.  The result 
was poor.  Industry and APVMA should work collaboratively along with departmental policy 
staff with responsibility for reducing the regulatory burden on industry, to achieve meaningful 
reform which can be implemented by industry. 
                                                 
1 Results from Accord Industry Size and Scale Survey 2016 
2 ibid 
3 ANAO Report No. 56 2016-17 Pesticide and Veterinary Medicine Regulatory Reform Australia Pesticides and 
Veterinary Medicines Authority

Page 2 of 3 
 
 
Accord members continue to seek the development of a standard for dairy sanitisers modelled 
on the NZ group standards approach under Section 6E of the Agvet Code.  We welcome the 
opportunity to meet with departmental officers to further develop the reform option. 
 
In general, Accord is supportive of the proposed measures, although we note that they are of 
a minor nature.  Our comments and/or support for the proposals relevant to Accord’s 
membership is attached. 
 
Please do not hesitate to contact me on 02 9281 2322 or at dsabic@accord.asn.au should 
you have any questions in relation to Accord’s submission. 
 
Yours sincerely 
 
Authorised for electronic transmission 
 
Dusanka Sabic 
Director, Regulatory Reform 
 
21 July 2017

Page 3 of 3 
 
 
Proposal 1 – Clarifying confidential commercial information (CCI) provision 
Supported – It is noted that this proposal should reduce the uncertainty for APVMA staff 
regarding CCI disclosure, however this possibly could have been addressed through 
appropriate administrative arrangements such as development of clear policy guidelines and 
standard operating procedures.  The use of CCI requires ongoing monitoring to ensure that 
even with the proposed changes that no unintended disclosure of CCI occurs and that CCI 
remains protected within a lighter touch regulatory environment. 
 
Proposal 2 – Simplifying reporting requirements for annual returns 
Supported 
 
Proposal 3 – Increase the APVMA’s flexibility to manage minor errors in applications at 
the preliminary stage 
Supported 
 
Proposal 4 – APVMA amendment of the relevant particulars or conditions in a variation 
application  
Supported 
 
Proposal 6 – Enable a person to apply to vary the particulars of a label approval that is 
suspended 
Supported 
 
Proposal 7 – Amend the definition of ‘expiry date’ 
Supported 
 
Proposal 8 – Add antimicrobial resistance as a specific safety consideration 
Not supported.  This appears to be a very specific requirement for a very small group of 
products.  While Accord recognises that antimicrobial resistance is a growing global concern, 
indeed the Communique from the recent G20 Forum of 7-8 July referred to global actions to 
tackle antimicrobial resistance.  The aim is to restrict the use of antibiotics through responsible 
and prudent use.  We do not consider that any one safety criteria should be given greater 
consideration than other safety factors and that appropriate risk analysis and management for 
the entire product lifecycle should occur.  If this proceeds, then the scope of application needs 
to be clearly defined to avoid products which are not the target of the requirement to be 
inadvertently caught up. 
 
Proposal 9 – Including civil penalty provisions for false or misleading information 
Supported but any additional provisions should be consistent with the Government’s 
Regulatory Powers (Standard Provisions) Act 2014 (RPSPA) which provides the framework 
for standard regulatory powers to be exercised by agencies across the Commonwealth. The 
key features of the RPSPA include standard provisions in relation to monitoring and 
investigation powers, as well as enforcement provisions using civil penalties, infringement 
notices, enforceable undertakings and injunctions.  Implementation of the RPSPA supports 
the Government’s regulatory reform agenda as it simplifies and streamlines Commonwealth 
regulatory powers.  We understand that the provisions in the Biosecurity Act 2015 are based 
on the RPSPA and therefore Accord’s recommendation is not inconsistent with the intent of 
this reform.  We support the uniform adoption of the RPSPA by all Commonwealth entities 
with a regulatory function and support consistency of the Agvet Code provisions with the 
RPSPA. 
 
Proposal 10 – Minor technical amendments to the Administration Act and Agvet Code 
Supported