First Name: Brett 
Last Name: Delsimone 
Stakeholder Category: Producer association - Hills Orchard Improvement Group Inc 
Comments: The IGAB refers to shared responsibility between government, industry and community 
and identifies public good, risk creators and risk beneficiaries as part of the system. However, the 
IGAB does not provide a mechanism for shared funding between the risk creators, risk beneficiaries 
and government representing the community. A legislated funding mechanism that apportions costs 
equitably between these groups should be established through the IGAB/COAG model. As producers 
in Western Australia, which is free of Queensland fruit fly and codling moth, the Hills Orchard 
Improvement Group sees the major biosecurity risk as interstate transport of fruit, with the logistics 
industry, wholesalers, agents and major supermarkets bringing thousands of tonnes of fruit from 
endemic pest regions into pest-free areas. Only those shipments inspected at the border are charged 
a fee for maintaining this biosecurity operation. It would be more equitable to charge a flat fee 
across the logistics chain to fund border inspections and eradication when incursions are found. 
Producers are charged a fee-for-service cost at a state level in Western Australia and levies at a 
national level. Equity requires a similar contribution from risk creators who profit from generating 
biosecurity risk.  
As it could be argued a fee on interstate transport is unconstitutional under s. 51 (ii) of the 
Australian Constitution if it is levied differentially between the states the cost to risk creators should 
be legislated as a fee for service to support biosecurity measures on interstate trade, as allowed for 
in s. 51 (1). 
See Constitution s. 51: The Parliament shall, subject to this Constitution, have power to make laws 
for the peace, order, and good government of the Commonwealth with respect to:  
(i) trade and commerce with other countries, and among the States;  
(ii) taxation; but so as not to discriminate between States or parts of States. 
Is this submission confidential? No 
Do you agree to be contacted about your submission:  Yes