Australian Government 
" Department of Agriculture 
and Water Resources 
Submission on the Exposure Draft of the Agricultural and 
Veterinary Chemicals Legislation Amendment (Operational 
Efficiency) Bill 2017 
Purpose of this form 
Before applying 
Closing date 
To complete this form 
Your submission must 
include 
Post or email 
{preferred) your 
submission 
Section 
Applicant 
For individuals and organisations to provide submissions on the 
Exposure Draft of the Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals Legislation 
Amendment (Operational Efficiency) Bill 2017. 
Use this form to provide a submission or to write a long-form response. 
You can also attach a separate response. 
See Agriculture and Veterinary Chemicals Legislation Amendment 
(Operational Efficiency) Bill 2017. 
19 July 2017 
Save the document to your computer. 
D a completed and signed submission form 
D where relevant, supporting information from organisations, written 
on their official letterhead. 
Agvet Chemicals 
Sustainable Agriculture, Fisheries& Forestry Division 
Department of Agriculture and Water Resources 
GPO Box 858 
Canberra ACT 2601 
Email agvetreform@agriculture.gov.au 
1 Organisation name {if applicable): Horticulture Innovation Australia Limited 
2 Contact address 
Postal address: Level 81 1 Chifley Square 
Suburb/town/city: Sydney 
State/territory NSW Postcode 2000 
Submission on the Exposure Draft of the Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals Legislation Amendment 
(Operational Efficiency) Bill 2017 
Page 1 of 7

3 Contact person 
Given name{s) _DFaFviFd __________ Family name Moore 
Work phone XX XXXX XXXX   Mobile phone XXXX XXX XXX 
Email XXXXXXX@XXXXXXXXXXXX 
4 Is all of your submission confidential? 
No [:g) 
Yes D Clearly mark the submission 'In confidence' 
5 Is part of your submission confidential? 
No [:g) 
Yes D Clearly mark the relevant section{s) 'In confidence' 
on 
Unless you request otherwise, the department will publish your name, organisation and the title of 
your submission on its website. Your contact information will not be made available. 
6 Do you agree to your submission being made publicly available? 
No D Go to question 8 
Yes [:g] Go to question 7 
7 Do you agree to your name and state/territory being listed? 
NoO 
Yes [:g] 
8 Do you agree to the department contacting you about your submission if required? 
NoD 
Yes [:g] 
Submission 
9 What type of submission are you making? (select one box only} 
[:g] Response to key topics in the draft report 
"7 Go to section F 
D Long-form response to the whole draft report "7 Go to section G 
D Separate response in an attached document 
"7 Go to section H 
Section 
Response to key topics in the consultation paper 
Support your answers with references. 
Submission on the Exposure Draft of the Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals Legislation Amendment 
(Operational Efficiency) Bill 2017 
Page 2 of7

10 Comment on clarifying confidential commercial information provisions. 
Hort Innovation has concerns over how data submitted in support of minor use permit (MUP) 
applications is to be managed given the proposed changes. Hort Innovation understands that data 
submitted in support of a MUP is not considered confidential commercial information (CCI) under the 
Act. However. as Hort Innovation is, on occasion, being asked by the APVMA to provide full studies to 
support MUP renewals. questions have arisen over the status and management of such data, i.e., 
could submitted data be disclosed to third parties given the data is not considered confidential 
commercial information? When seeking such data from collaborating registrants Hort Innovation has 
encountered questions over whether such data could be accessed by a third party without the 
authority of the data owner, given CCI does not apply. This uncertainty can impact the ability of Hort 
Innovation to fulfil APVMA data requirements, as such data sharing is considered problematic by 
registrants. Such registrant reluctance can impede the ability of Hort Innovation to retain access to 
much needed minor use chemicals. As a result Hort Innovation believes clarification is needed over 
the management of such data, i.e., whether via a policy statement or development of a legislative 
amendment, to ensure data submitted in support of a MUP application can't be relied upon by third 
parties, when seeking label amendments. without the authority of the data submitter/owner. 
11 Comment on simplifying reporting requirements for annual returns. 
12 Comment on increasing the APVMA's flexibility to manage minor errors in applications at 
preliminary assessment. 
13 Comment on APVMA amendment of the relevant particulars or conditions in a variation 
application. 
14 Comment on timeframe for notifying FSANZ about variations to the MRL Standard. 
Submission on the Exposure Draft of the Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals Legislation Amendment 
(Operational Efficiency) Bill 2017 
Page 3 of7

15 Comment on enabling a person to vary the particulars of a label approval that is suspended. 
16 Comment on the amendments to the definition of 'expiry date'. 
17 Comment on adding the potential for human exposure to antimicrobial resistant 
microorganisms as a specific safety consideration. 
18 Comment on including civil penalty provisions for false or misleading information. 
19 Comment on other minor and technical amendments to the Agvet Code and the Administration 
Act. 
Submission on the Exposure Draft of the Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals Legislation Amendment 
{Operational Efficiency) Bill 2017 
Page 4 of 7

20 Other comments. This could include additional information or relevant issues to be raised. 
Hort Innovation believes economic incentives are needed to help improve access to new farm 
chemicals in minor crops. Current government activity via Agvet chemicals grants programme, while 
welcomed, is unlikely to provide a long-lasting solution. Hort Innovation therefore believes 
downstream mechanisms, that provide strong incentives for companies to invest, are needed to 
boost the attractiveness of including minor crops to registrants when seeking new product 
a rovals. 
"7 Go to section H 
Section G: 
consultation 
21 Support your response with references. Attach additional sheets if necessary. 
Submission on the Exposure Draft of the Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals Legislation Amendment 
(Operational Efficiency) Bill 2017 
Page 5 of 7

Submission on the Exposure Draft of the Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals Legislation Amendment 
(Operational Efficiency) Bill 2017 
Page 6 of 7

--· _ _,,(=b
Section H: Applicant decla'ration 
To be completed by the person listed in section B of this application. 
I understand that: 
•
the Australian Government reserves the right to refuse to publish submissions, or parts of
submissions, that contain offensive language, potentially defamatory material or copyright
infringing materia I
•
a request may be made under the Freedom of Information Act 1982 for a submission marked
confidential to be made available. Such requests will be determined in accordance with
provisions under that Act
•
if I provide personal information about an individual other than myself, I must make that person
aware of the privacy notice in section I of this form and draw their attention to the department's
privacy policy.
1 
Signature (type or sign your name) --
=-e1:--'-v_) ot_/Jl_= 
__ .e-_)-1----
Date (dd/mm/yyyy) ""'""17^/_0_7`/a2a01=7 _________________ _ 
Full name 
David Moore 
Section I: Privacy notice 
'Personal information' means information or an opinion about an identified individual, or an 
individual who is reasonably identifiable. 
The collection of personal information by the Department of Agriculture and Water Resources in 
relation to this submission is for the purposes of gathering information on the Exposure Draft of the 
Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals (Operational Efficiency) Bill and related purposes. If you do 
not provide this information, the department will be unable to contact you to discuss your 
submission. 
Under the Freedom of Information Act 1982, submissions marked confidential may be made 
available. Such requests will be determined in accordance with provisions under that Act. 
Personal information may be published on the department's website, disclosed to other Australian 
agencies, persons or organisations where necessary for these purposes, provided the disclosure is 
consistent with relevant laws, in particular the Privacy Act 1988. Your personal information will be 
used and stored in accordance with the Privacy Principles. 
See the department's Privacy Policy to learn more about accessing or correcting personal 
information or making a complaint. Alternatively, telephone the department on +61 2 6272 3933. 
Submission on the Exposure Draft of the Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals Legislation Amendment 
(Operational Efficiency) Bill 2017 
Page 7 of 7