This step-by-step guide will help you prepare your cat or dog for import into mainland Australia from New Zealand.
You can print this guide and use it as a checklist.
Need to know
This is a complex process. Before you start the import process, we recommend you read this guide in full.
- Allow 1–2 months to organise health checks, tests and paperwork. Cats and dogs that have lived outside Australia or New Zealand may take at least 6 months to prepare for import.
- All procedures must be completed by a New Zealand Ministry for Primary Industries (MPI) listed veterinarian. This veterinarian must work at a New Zealand MPI listed veterinary practice.
- Fees apply for our services, such as document assessment and inspection.
- Overseas travel can cause stress to animals. If your dog or cat is sick or elderly, consider if this is the right decision for them.
1
We encourage you to use an experienced pet transport agent or shipper.
Importing a cat or dog to Australia can be a complex process.
If the cat or dog has only lived in Australia or New Zealand, the typical timeframe is about 1 month.
It will take longer for a cat or dog that has lived outside Australia or New Zealand. This may be at least 6–7 months, depending on travel history.
You will need to make sure your cat or dog meets a range of import conditions. This includes veterinary checks and treatments.
Seek help from a pet transport agent with experience in importing cats and dogs to Australia. They will help guide you through the import process.
To find a pet transport agent or shipper you can:
- search online (use terms like ‘pet transport agent Australia’)
- check the International Pet and Animal Transportation Association (IPATA).
We cannot recommend one agent over another. We have no influence over any fees or charges an agent may require for their services.
2
You must meet all conditions before you can bring your cat or dog to Australia.
Cats and dogs travelling to Australia from New Zealand on a vessel via sea (either commercial or non-commercial) must also meet the import conditions in this guide.
Check if this is the right guide for you
This step-by-step guide is for cats or dogs exported from New Zealand to Australia.
New Zealand is considered a Group 1 country. This means it’s an approved country of origin for cats and dogs imported to Australia.
Other Group 1 countries have separate step-by-step guides. These are Norfolk Island and Cocos (Keeling) Islands.
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
New Zealand
Norfolk Island
You are not sending your cat or dog from New Zealand.
Find the right step-by-step guide for your animal and country of export.
Confirm your cat or dog is eligible for import to Australia
To be eligible for import to Australia, your cat or dog must have either:
- only lived in New Zealand since birth, or
- only lived in New Zealand since being imported from Australia, or
- only lived in New Zealand for at least 180 days immediately before the date of export (if the cat or dog has ever lived in a country other than Australia or New Zealand).
Your cat or dog can be living with you or someone else in New Zealand while being prepared for export.
When you plan to export your cat or dog, it must NOT be:
- under quarantine restrictions
- less than 8 weeks old
- more than 40 days pregnant
- nursing kittens or puppies.
Some cat and dog breeds are not allowed into Australia.
This includes some hybrid cats and dogs (domestic and non-domestic) and some pure-bred dogs that are prohibited breeds.
These bans relate to environmental protection and customs laws, not biosecurity laws.
For more on hybrid animals, you will need to contact the Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment, and Water (DCCEEW) at exotic.species@dcceew.gov.au.
For more on prohibited breeds, please visit Australian Border Force.
Cat breeds
Hybrid cats NOT allowed into Australia include (but are not limited to) the following breeds and any crossbred offspring derived from them:
- Savannah cats: domestic cat (Felis catus) crossed with serval cat (Felis serval)
- Safari cats: domestic cat crossed with Geoffroy cat (Oncifelis geoffroyi)
- Chausie cats: domestic cat crossed with Jungle cat (Felis chaus)
- Bengal cats: domestic cat crossed with Asian leopard cat (Prionalilurus bengalensis), except in some cases.
Importing a hybrid breed
If an imported cat is identified as possibly being a hybrid after arrival in Australia, DCCEEW may investigate further.
Bengal cat policy change
As of 1 March 2026, Bengal cats are no longer permitted to enter Australia.
For further information on this policy change, please refer to the DCCEEW news release.
Dog breeds
Hybrid dogs NOT allowed into Australia include (but are not limited to) the following breeds and any crossbred offspring derived from them:
- Czechoslovakian wolfdog or Czechoslovakian Vicak
- Saarloos wolfdog or Saarloos wolfhound
- Lupo Italiano or Italian wolfdog
- Kunming wolfdog or Kunming dog.
Contact the Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water at exotic.species@dcceew.gov.au. They can provide more advice on hybrid animals.
Pure breed dogs banned from Australia include:
- Dogo Argentino
- Fila Brasileiro
- Japanese tosa
- American Pit Bull Terrier or Pit Bull Terrier
- Perro de Presa Canario or Presa Canario.
Mixed-breed dogs are allowed if the dog meets all other import conditions. Visit Australian Border Force for more advice on prohibited pure breed dogs.
If your cat or dog is sick or old
Sick and elderly animals do not cope with long distance travel and climatic stress.
We do not recommend importing sick or very old animals. International travel can cause them to de-stabilise and rapidly deteriorate. Even cats and dogs with well-managed chronic diseases can arrive in distress and poor health.
If your cat or dog relies on regularly administered medication, please consider that animals may be unable to get medication during transport. As a pet owner, you must consider if it’s in your pet’s best interests to travel the distance.
Seek advice from the New Zealand Ministry for Primary Industries
There are 2 types of veterinary health certificates which may be issued:
- A pre-printed export certificate (AUPET9) completed and issued by a private veterinarian from a NZ MPI listed veterinary practice, or
- An official assurance certificate (AUPETOA9) completed and issued by a NZ MPI official veterinarian.
The certificates will specify the conditions the cat or dog must meet to be eligible for import.
A veterinarian at an MPI listed veterinary practice can help determine what certificate you need. If your cat or dog does not meet all the criteria for AUPET9, you’ll need to get an official assurance certificate.
Find out more about NZ MPI requirements and view sample certificates.
If you’re unsure, you can also email the NZ MPI at animalexports@mpi.govt.nz.
Don’t risk arriving in Australia with the wrong checks, treatments or certificates.
Talk to the NZ MPI to determine which type of health certificate your pet needs. They will help you locate a listed veterinary practice and veterinarian who can prepare your animal for export and issue the correct certificate.
Export conditions can vary between countries. NZ MPI can advise you on extra steps you need to take that aren’t in this guide.
Read through this guide
We recommend you read this whole guide before you start the import process.
Share this guide with your NZ MPI listed veterinary practice and pet transport company. They will help you meet all conditions.
Make sure you’re aware of how far ahead of your export date you need to start each step.
3
Microchips are the only approved identification method. The NZ MPI will use the microchip to verify your cat or dog’s identity.
A private veterinarian from a NZ MPI listed veterinary practice must scan the microchip:
- at each visit
- before any pre-export blood sampling.
They will check that the microchip number is recorded on all documentation.
Your cat or dog must be implanted with a microchip that is ISO compliant. Generally, microchips with 10 or 15 digits are ISO compliant.
Microchip numbers starting with 999 are not accepted because they are not unique.
It is essential your cat or dog has a working compliant microchip before you start the import process.
The veterinarian must scan your animal’s microchip at each veterinary visit. They must accurately record the microchip number on all documents including test samples. This is how we match your cat or dog to its preparations and documents.
We do not accept changes to laboratory reports or other documents to include or amend the microchip.
If a microchip cannot be read or is incorrect in your documents, your cat or dog cannot be imported to Australia.
If your cat or dog has 2 compliant microchips
Both microchips must be scanned and recorded at each veterinary visit. They must match all import documents.
If your cat or dog has a compliant microchip and a non-compliant microchip, we will only use the compliant microchip.
If your cat or dog’s microchip stops working
The veterinarian should try multiple microchip scanners to read the microchip. An X-ray can be used to locate the microchip if it has moved from the implant site.
4
Plan enough time to complete all required vet checks and treatments.
You can send your cat or dog by sea or by air. You can use any operator or airline, at their discretion.
Find a list of animal transport companies on the International Pet and Animal Transportation Association (IPATA) website.
Travel by air
Your cat or dog must travel:
- as manifested cargo (not in the cabin)
- in an International Air Transport Association (IATA) approved crate.
Domestic transfers
We will inspect your animal and their import documents at the first point of entry into Australia.
If your cat or dog is connecting with a domestic flight, you’ll need to arrange for it to be moved from the international to the domestic terminal of the airport.
Animal transport agents or pet shippers can help you with this. Find a list of pet shippers on the IPATA website.
Allow at least 1 hour for your cat or dog to be released by airline cargo and cleared by us.
Travel by sea
Your cat or dog may travel directly to Australia from New Zealand on a vessel.
Cats and dogs travelling on a vessel from New Zealand directly to Australia do not need to travel as manifested cargo. They must be secure on the vessel and arrive at a first point of entry for live cats and dogs. They must meet all health certificate requirements and import conditions.
No cats or dogs, except those for import to Australia, may be carried on the vessel without prior approval by the department.
See more about animals on vessels.
5
These must be completed by a private veterinarian employed by a NZ MPI listed veterinary practice in New Zealand.
The NZ MPI will advise you of the listed veterinarian you will need to see. This will depend on the type of veterinary health certificate your cat or dog requires (See step 2.3).
Check all timings of tests and treatments as soon as possible.
Plan early. Make sure all treatments and tests are completed in the correct timeframes before export.
All preparations are calculated from the date of export, local time in the country of export. For calculating timeframes, the date of the treatment or preparation counts as ‘day 0’.
Find a NZ MPI listed veterinary practice
All veterinary preparations must be done:
- by a private veterinarian employed by a NZ MPI listed veterinary practice
- in New Zealand.
Find a listed veterinary practice (NZ MPI website).
We recommend you share this step-by-step guide with your preparing veterinarian.
The veterinarian will help prepare a schedule of treatments and tests to ensure you meet all import conditions. This information is also useful to share with pet transport companies.
Check recommended vaccinations
This is an optional step.
We recommend that your cat or dog is vaccinated against diseases that are present in Australia.
Some Australian states and territories have their own vaccination requirements. It’s your responsibility to check and comply with these.
Cats
We recommend that your cat is vaccinated against:
- feline enteritis (also known as feline panleucopenia or feline distemper)
- rhinotracheitis
- calicivirus.
These diseases exist in Australia.
Dogs
We recommend that your dog is vaccinated against:
- distemper
- hepatitis
- parvovirus
- parainfluenza
- Bordetella bronchiseptica.
These diseases exist in Australia.
Test for Leishmania infantum (dogs only)
A veterinarian from a NZ MPI listed veterinary practice must scan and verify your dog’s microchip. They must collect and test a blood sample using one of these methods:
- an indirect fluorescent antibody titre (IFAT) test, or
- an enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
The test must produce a negative result.
The test result only remains valid if the dog continuously lives in NZ from the sampling date until export to Australia.
Treat for Babesia canis (dogs only)
Dogs must be treated by a private veterinarian from an NZ MPI listed veterinary practice with imidocarb dipropionate.
The treatments are either:
- a subcutaneous injection at 7.5 mg/kg bodyweight, or
- 2 subcutaneous injections, at an interval of 2 weeks.
If the dog was treated for Babesia canis to allow import to Australia or New Zealand additional treatment may not be needed. Dogs must have been continuously living in New Zealand or Australia since this treatment. The NZ MPI official veterinarian will need to attest to this treatment. You will need to check with the NZ MPI before organising treatment.
Treat for external parasites
A private veterinarian from a NZ MPI listed veterinary practice must treat your cat or dog with a compliant topical product. The product must kill ticks and fleas on contact and remain effective until export. It must be applied within 5 days before the date of export to Australia.
Oral treatments for external parasites do not generally meet Australian import conditions.
The veterinarian may need to repeat the treatment to maintain protection until export. They must follow the manufacturer’s directions. If the reapplication periods for fleas and ticks differ, you must follow the shortest reapplication period.
At each visit after the treatment has started, the veterinarian must examine your cat or dog for external parasites. If fleas or ticks are found they must be removed, and the treatment restarted.
See acceptable external parasite treatments.
To calculate 5 days before the date of export, count the first day of treatment as day 0. For example, if treatment is given on 1 January, then the latest date of export is 6 January.
Treat for internal parasites
A private veterinarian from a NZ MPI listed veterinary practice must treat your cat or dog with a compliant internal parasite treatment effective against nematodes and cestodes (internal parasites). This must be done within 5 days before the date of export to Australia.
See acceptable internal parasite treatments.
To calculate 5 days before the date of export, count the first day of treatment as day 0. For example, if treatment is given on 1 January, then the latest date of export is 6 January.
Combined products that cover both nematodes and cestodes are available in many countries.
Time saver
It’s acceptable to do the final health check and internal and external parasite treatments at the same vet visit.
6
These are the final preparation activities before you export your cat or dog.
You must have a veterinary health certificate issued by a vet from an NZ MPI listed veterinary practice, or a NZ MPI official veterinarian.
Book a pre-export clinical examination
Your cat or dog must be examined for external parasites and clinical signs of infectious or contagious disease. A private veterinarian from a NZ MPI listed veterinary practice, or MPI official veterinarian must do this within 5 days before the date of export to Australia.
The vet must attest to the requirements as outlined on the in the appropriate section of the relevant health certificate for your cat or dog. They must declare that the animal is:
- treated for external and internal parasites within 5 days of the date of export
- free from external parasites and clinical signs of infectious or contagious disease
- fit for travel.
Within 5 days before your cat or dog’s export date.
It’s acceptable to do the internal and external parasite treatments at the same vet visit as the final vet check.
Check MPI office hours and timeframes
Government offices may be closed over local public holidays and weekends. You will need to make sure that you have enough time to get the veterinary health certificate endorsed before export.
Complete mandatory declarations
If NZ MPI determine you need to complete the AUPET9 export certificate, the exporter must complete a declaration on the veterinary health certificate. This states:
- the breed, sex, age and microchip number of your cat or dog
- your cat or dog has resided in New Zealand since birth, or direct import from Australia, or for the 180 days immediately before the date of export
- your cat or dog is not derived from a domestic or non-domestic hybrid
- your dog is not a banned breed
- if female, that the cat or dog is not more than 40 days pregnant or nursing kittens at the time of export
- whether your dog has ever been to mainland Africa.
If the exporter is not the owner, then the owner of the cat or dog must also complete a statutory declaration. This must be witnessed by a Justice of the Peace. An example of where the exporter is not owner is if the owner is using a pet transport agent.
Get your veterinary health certificate completed
The veterinary health certificate is an agreed document between us and the NZ MPI.
If NZ MPI determine you need to complete the AUPET9 export certificate, the vet from a NZ MPI listed veterinary practice will issue you with a unique, numbered veterinary health certificate. They will issue the certificate at the pre-export clinical examination.
If NZ MPI determine you need to complete the AUPETOA9 official assurance export certificate, a NZ MPI official veterinarian will issue the certificate at the final pre-export examination.
The veterinary health certificate must certify that:
- the veterinarian has scanned and confirmed the microchip listed on the veterinary health certificate
- New Zealand is free from rabies, Brucella canis, Leptospira canicola, and indigenous cases of leishmaniasis
- all conditions, tests and treatments specified on the veterinary health certificate have been met.
Ask your vet from a NZ MPI listed veterinary practice if you must meet extra requirements.
 
In some cases, you may need:
- a veterinary certificate issued by a NZ MPI official veterinarian
- tests and treatments to be endorsed by a NZ MPI official veterinarian.
The vet from a NZ MPI listed veterinary practice can advise you if this is required.
Gather your import documents
Send all import documents with your cat or dog.
 
The veterinary health certificate must travel to Australia with your cat or dog.
Keep a copy of each document for your records.
Your cat or dog must arrive in Australia with these documents:
- a veterinary health certificate (either AUPET9 or AUPETOA9)
- laboratory test reports (if relevant).
The veterinary health certificate must be an original document. Copies will not be accepted.
Notify us
Email the regional office in the state or territory where your animal will first arrive in Australia.
Your email must include:
- the date and estimated time of arrival
- the flight number (unless travelling via vessel)
- the air waybill number (unless travelling via vessel)
- a short description of your cat or dog
- a contact phone number in Australia or New Zealand
- whether your dog is an assistance dog.
If your cat or dog is travelling on a sea vessel, the vessel master must notify the department at least 3 days before arrival at the first port of entry in Australia.
Office contacts in Australia
New South Wales – ceranimalimports@aff.gov.au
Victoria – seanimal@aff.gov.au AND VIC.Controller@aff.gov.au
Queensland – qldliveanimalimports@aff.gov.au
South Australia – adelaide.airport@aff.gov.au
Western Australia – wacatanddogimports@aff.gov.au
Tasmania – tas.controller@aff.gov.au
Northern Territory – ntliveanimalimports@aff.gov.au
Australian Capital Territory – actregoffice@aff.gov.au
General inquiry: 1800 900 090 or + 61 3 8318 6700 (from outside Australia).
7
What to do when you’re ready to send your cat or dog, and what will happen when they arrive.
Pay fees and charges
You will be charged for the time taken to assess the documents that arrive with your animal.
Details of our fees can be found in our charging guidelines. Contact the relevant state or territory office to check the fees for clearing your cat or dog.
Fees are usually collected by the airline carrying your animal. The payment should appear on the air waybill (issued by the airline). We will invoice the airline to recover the fees.
Make sure your air waybill includes details of fees you have paid.
If the air waybill does not include these fees, you will need to pay us before your animal is released.
Prepare your cat or dog for air travel
On the day of air travel:
- place your cat or dog in an International Air Transport Association (IATA) approved crate (see Step 4)
- do not place any items, including toys, medication or items of value, in the crate (these will be destroyed as biosecurity waste upon arrival).
In most cases, you will check your cat or dog in at the freight terminal, not the passenger terminal.
If your dog or cat is travelling with you on a vessel, refer to our animals on vessels page for more information.
When your cat or dog arrives in Australia
A biosecurity officer will check the cat or dog. They must verify that all details match the import documents.
Your animal will be released from biosecurity control if everything is acceptable. If not, more documents may be requested.
If your cat or dog is transferring to a domestic flight, this can happen after they are cleared by us.
Register your cat or dog in Australia
You are responsible for meeting any local requirements in Australia.
Contact your local Australian council or government. They can tell you what you must do. This may include registering your cat or dog and their microchip and paying yearly fees.
Your local hospital or animal shelter may also be able to advise you.