The Indonesia–Australia Partnership on Food Security in the Red Meat and Cattle Sector (the Partnership) is a bilateral initiative established in 2013.
It aims to develop a competitive, efficient and sustainable Australia–Indonesia red meat and cattle industry as part of a globally competitive supply chain.
The Partnership is a unique forum that brings together Indonesian and Australian decision makers from government and industry. Together they foster enduring relations and to maximise the opportunities for development and collaboration amongst the Indonesian and Australian red meat and cattle sectors.
We co-chair the Partnership along with the Indonesia Investment Coordinating Board (BKPM). Together we act as secretariat support for our respective countries.
Reference groups advise us on Partnership priorities and industry issues more broadly. They Comprise industry members, and are formed in line with the Partnership’s priorities, including:
- Investment
- supply chains
- capacity building
- innovation and export
- communication.
Find out more on the Indonesia Australia Red Meat and Cattle Partnership website.
[Expand all]
Membership
The Partnership has members from:
- Indonesian and Australian government agencies
- the red meat and cattle sectors
- the business and investment community.
Non-government members from both countries bring a wealth of experience. This includes areas such as cattle processing and livestock production, livestock export, breeding, and broader business and investment expertise.
The Partnership reports to the:
- Australian Government Minister for Agriculture and Northern Australia
- Chair of BKPM.
It is co-chaired by:
- Our First Assistant Secretary of the Trade, Market Access and International Division
- The Deputy Chairperson of BKPM.
We provide secretariat support along with the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. The Advisory Support Group provides project management, communication and administrative support.
Partnership meetings
Members meet up to twice a year to discuss relevant policy matters. This allows all members to increase their shared understanding and work together for mutual benefit. The discussions provide recommendations for the Partnership’s work program.
Additional information, including meeting communiques, are available on the Partnership’s website.
Projects
Advice and recommendations from the Partnership are translated into practical work programs. The projects help develop a competitive, efficient and sustainable Australia-Indonesia red meat and cattle industry.
See all Partnership-funded projects.
Indonesia-Australia Commercial Cattle Breeding Program (IACCB)
The IACCB (2016–2021) works with medium to large enterprises and commercial smallholder cooperatives to develop commercially sustainable beef cattle breeding models. The outcomes of this project will be shared with the broader commercial beef cattle industry in Indonesia. This will enable innovation, expansion and investment in the sector.
Find out more about the IACCB program.
Northern Territory Cattlemen’s Association (NTCA) Pastoral Student Program
Indonesian undergraduate agricultural students undertake a combination of competency-based, accredited learning and real industry experience through extensive industry training and placements at selected corporate and family run cattle stations in the Northern Territory.
Find out more about the NTCA project.
Latest Updates
Keep up-to-date with our e-updates and newsletters. You can subscribe to the e-updates and newsletters on the Partnership’s website.
The e-update highlights project activities and lists recent and upcoming meetings and events.
The newsletter helps build awareness of the Partnership’s work and achievements. It includes interviews, photos, updates on program activities and case studies. It is produced bi-annually in both English and Bahasa.
Funding and governance arrangements
The Partnership was announced in 2014, as a joint agreement between heads of government. The Australian Government provided $60 million to 2024. This included $50 million of Official Development Assistance (ODA) administered by DFAT, and $10 million of non-ODA funding that we administer.