We support egg exporters to access markets overseas, but other government agencies and industry groups also have a role in exporting from Australia.

If you are involved in exporting eggs or egg products, you are responsible for understanding your regulatory obligations.

There are a range of resources available outside of our website that may be useful for your manufacturing and export activities.

Codes and standards

Australian Harmonised Export Commodity Codes

The Harmonised Commodity Description and Coding system is generally referred to as the ‘Harmonised System’ (HS). It is a multi-purpose international product classification nomenclature developed by the World Customs Organisation (WCO) and is used to classify traded products.

The customs tariff classification adds two sets of two digit codes to the six–digit international HS. Australia uses an eight-digit code to classify goods for export. The first six align with international classification standards, while the last two digits are specific to Australian exports.

The classifications are not static and are subject to change. It is very important to keep up-to-date with any changes as they occur. The AHECC is usually updated every January and July and up-to-date versions of the classifications can be found at the Australian Bureau of Statistics website.

Failure to properly classify your product could lead to incorrect taxation on your exports and the potential loss of the product.

Codex Alimentarius

The Codex Alimentarius (CODEX) or ‘Food Code’ are harmonised international food standards, which protect consumer health and promote fair practices in food trade.

CODEX requirements provide guidance for a Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points (HACCP) plan to meet export requirements.

Food Standards Code

The Australia New Zealand Food Standards Code is developed and administered by Food Standards Australia New Zealand.

The Code lists requirements for foods such as:

- additives

- food safety

- labelling

- genetically modified (GM) foods.

Enforcement and interpretation of the Code is the responsibility of state and territory departments and food agencies within Australia and New Zealand.

The Code includes general food, food product, food safety and primary production standards.

User guides to the Code are available to help industry comply with the Code. The guides, unlike the standards, are not legally binding.

National Salmonella Enteritidis Monitoring & Accreditation Program (NSEMAP)

Salmonella Enteritidis (SE) is a type of Salmonella that is present in most international egg industries.

The NSEMAP is available to all commercial egg producers in Australia. An accreditation certificate can be issued by the NSW Department of Primary Industries (DPI) for accredited flocks, which can be used as evidence of the SE-free status of these flocks and their eggs for export markets.

Publications

Good Management Practices (GMPs) for egg producers

Each farm or enterprise should conduct an individual hazard analysis to identify all the management practices required to protect their farm. Additional information on GMPs are available for egg producers in Australia.

Food safety guidelines for the preparation of raw egg products

Food retail businesses that sell food containing raw egg should follow specific safety steps for preparation Guidance on how to meet food safety regulations is available for manufacturers who prepare raw egg products in Australia.

Industry groups

Australian Egg Corporation Limited

The Australian Egg Corporation Limited (AECL) is a provider of marketing and research & development services for the benefit of all stakeholders, principally egg producers.