A commercially vibrant, sustainable and 
self-reliant raw sugar and sugarcane 
derived products industry through: 
• committed cane growers and millers being responsive to 
international and domestic market forces; and  
• operating in an open, deregulated industry environment, within 
Australia’s corporate governance framework.

i

ii

iii 
Table of Contents 
Preface                                                                                                        1 
Summary and Recommendations                                                               3 
Chapter 
1. 
Issues, Reform Implementation and Recommendations                15 
2. 
Regional Plans                                                                                39 
3. 
World Sugar Market                                                                       49 
4. 
Brazil                                                                                              67 
5. 
Australia’s Sugar Industry                                                              85 
Appendices  
A. Statement of Intent                                                                            111 
B. IOG Terms of Reference and Members                                            113 
C. RAG Terms of Reference                                                                  117 
D. Sugar Industry Reform Programme 2004 Summary                         119 
E. Potential Diversification Opportunities for the Sugar Industry        125 
F. Additional Information about Issues in the Sugar Industry              131 
Acknowledgements                                                                                139 
Glossary                                                                                                  141 
Bibliography                                                                                           143

iv

- 1 - 
PREFACE 
Programme (SIRP) 2004, including funding of up to AUD444.4 million, in response 
to a crisis in Australia’s sugar industry induced by a protracted period of low world 
market prices. The impact of depressed prices was compounded by low production as 
a result of a few years of unusual seasons and an increased incidence of pests and 
diseases. Many in the industry were experiencing severe financial difficulty. The 
government provided assistance for short-term relief while participants considered 
their options. The package also included assistance for an industry that had committed 
to reform and restructure, and to driving towards its own viability and sustainability. 
In addition to the SIRP 2004, the Queensland Government also contributed some 
assistance up to AUD33 million. 
The regional plans confirm the industry will remain raw sugar dependent in the 
medium term at least. One of the disappointing aspects is that, contrary to commonly 
held views, genuine diversification options of industry-wide significance are limited 
at this time. 
In mid-2005 futures prices started to indicate what has now become evident as a 
cyclical upturn, with actual (as opposed to real) prices in 2006 approaching those last 
recorded 25 years ago. The present favourable prices will not last. What is unknown is 
the duration of this cycle. This period of high prices should be used to reform and 
restructure the industry for the benefit of committed cane growers and millers and 
regional communities. It is a wonderful opportunity to consider and develop other 
products, explore the benefits of managed scale, reduce or eliminate embedded debt, 
further exploit existing technologies, seek and adopt new technology, and build 
reserves. Brazil, the dominant market supplier, has announced plans for significant 
investment to substantially expand its industry.  
Building of reserves is most important. It is clear the industry needs substantial 
re-investment. To be self sustaining and self-reliant, access to and application of 
capital needs careful consideration.  
It is to be hoped the current prosperity does not lull some into complacency, because 
of the obvious consequences for many if medium-term viability and sustainability are 
not achieved. 
The regional plans highlight issues, with some proposed solutions – this process is 
ongoing. The key to success will be implementation of well thought out strategies to 
achieve viability and then sustainability – this will require well-developed commercial 
skills and ‘leadership’ in the full sense of the word.

- 2 -

- 3 - 
SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
The future viability and sustainability of Australia’s sugar industry is inextricably tied 
to volatile cycles of the freely traded residual raw sugar market. Australia is 
essentially an exporter of a simply transformed commodity, raw sugar. The relatively 
small domestic sugar market is deregulated. The prices received are determined by a 
volatile market and, as for other agricultural commodities, there is a long-term 
downward trend in real terms. 
Vision 
Australia’s industry 
Australia’s sugar industry is located in three states and in many respects the three 
discrete geographical areas can be regarded as three different ‘businesses’:1  
• Queensland accounts for around 94 per cent of Australia’s production and over 
80 per cent of its production is exported, predominantly to Pacific Rim markets. 
• New South Wales is primarily focused on the domestic refined white sugar 
market.  
• Western Australia exports raw sugar through links to a related company.  
Australia’s sugar industry has an annual production base of approximately 38 million 
tonnes of sugarcane. It is less than one tenth of the size of the expanding industry in 
Brazil, which is the dominant exporter to the world sugar market.2  
The industry in its markets 
The Industry Oversight Group (IOG) has been asked to enunciate a vision for the 
sugar industry’s viability and sustainability. In 2004, the IOG established parameters 
which included a raw sugar pool price equivalent of $250 Australian Dollars 
(AUD250) per tonne as a basis for planning purposes to assess the industry’s viability 
and sustainability, because Brazil (the major competitor on the world market) 
demonstrated it could viably operate and expand at that equivalent value given the 
then currency relativity between the Brazilian Real (BRL) and the 
United States Dollar (USD).3  
The regional plans indicate that in many areas, as then structured, competing with 
Brazil against the IOG market parameters is unsustainable. Many participants in 
Australia’s industry are not viable or sustainable at AUD250 per tonne. Some regions 
believe a sugarcane-derived products industry may improve viability.  
Commodity cycles occur due to the dynamics of world market demand and world 
market supply of sugar. World demand is growing generically, mainly driven by 
consumption rising from a low base in developing and less-developed countries, 
because of population increases and income growth. Supply is more complex, 
1 The current status of Australia’s industry, including its organisational structure and positioning within 
Australia’s agriculture sector, is described in Chapter 5. 
2 An outline of the scale of Brazil’s sugar industry, the government policies that encouraged sugarcane 
production in Brazil, the potential for further industry expansion and an indication of the intrinsic value 
of sugar production to Brazil’s economy are described in Chapter 4. 
3 This is discussed further in Chapter 1.

- 4 - 
determined by factors such as seasonal world agribusiness dynamics and government 
interventions. The raw sugar market reconciles demand and supply by adjusting prices 
and, over time, a world price cycle is generated. 
Australia’s sugar industry is currently experiencing escalating prices for its raw sugar 
exports. This should be recognised as a phase within a cycle and represents a 
commodity ‘price bubble’ and not a longer term trend towards higher prices. 
The commodity cycle will turn down (the ‘price bubble’ will burst) and may be 
followed by a pronounced deterioration in prices, of prolonged duration, because the 
response to high prices will include: 
• increased supply of raw sugar by producer countries 
• contracting demand by consumers 
• substitution of sugar by artificial and other sweeteners 
• accelerated structural changes, as Brazil brings additional planned production onto 
the market 
• dietary changes away from sugar in middle-class societies. 
At the end of 2005 and in early 2006 indicative raw sugar prices on the New York 
Board of Trade more than doubled. They are now at the levels last recorded 25 years 
ago. This demonstrates the inherent volatility of the world sugar market against a 
long-term downward price trend in real terms.  
Australia’s raw sugar export industry is more exposed to the highly volatile world 
market than its competitors are. Australia’s raw sugar is priced on a residual world 
market which is distorted by other countries’ domestic policies and trade barriers. The 
local industry cannot influence the price – this is determined by a global commodity 
market.  
The industry must urgently reform and restructure to achieve viability and 
sustainability during this period of cyclically high prices.  
The industry must: 
• reduce costs throughout the sugarcane and raw sugar value chain  
• evaluate longer term diversification through ‘step-outs’ which have the potential 
to generate sufficient additional revenue streams to offset the effect of cyclically 
deteriorating sugar prices 
• accumulate reserves, when ‘super-normal’ profits accrue to Australia’s industry, 
to be drawn upon when revenues do not cover costs, including through the use of 
statutory measures such as taxation-effective deposit schemes. 
The repeal of sugar industry specific legislation in Queensland should ensure that 
sugarcane producing regions and milling areas have the commercial flexibility 
necessary to reform and restructure. The historic response of the industry had been to 
oppose deregulation. With staged deregulation, the response by some is to seek to 
maintain the structure and cultures of past regulation. The consequent preservation of 
practices and delay in adoption of innovative approaches has impeded the industry’s 
drive for international competitiveness. Some industry participants find it difficult to 
move away from past cultures. The industry requires a cultural shift to develop 
flexibility to respond to market forces and become self-reliant.

- 5 - 
The IOG Vision for the sugar industry is  
IOG Vision 
A commercially vibrant, sustainable and self-reliant raw sugar and sugarcane-
derived products industry, through: 
• committed cane growers and millers being responsive to international and 
domestic market forces; and  
• operating in an open, deregulated industry environment, within 
Australia’s corporate governance framework. 
Trading environment of the world market  
The global trade in sugar (raw and white) is comprised of two distinct markets – the 
‘freely traded raw sugar market’ and the ‘managed market’.4 The opportunity to trade 
freely is critical to Australia’s, and particularly Queensland’s, raw sugar industry. 
Australia exports in excess of 80 per cent of its raw sugar production and prices 
against the benchmark of the freely traded market, the New York Board of Trade Raw 
Sugar Futures Contract Number 11 (NY11).5 The exception is the very small amount 
exported to the United States market through a quota. 
Access to markets, domestic support and export subsidies are the three pillars in world 
agricultural trade negotiations. These issues particularly apply to sugar. The 
and bilateral forums.  
Most countries have domestic subsidies and/or apply trade barriers to protect their 
industries, and promote a case that sugar is a ‘sensitive product’.6 Such practices do 
not support flexibility, innovation and efficient allocation of resources. Australia’s 
sugar industry contends that sugar should not be designated as ‘sensitive’ within 
international forums. 
Recommendation 1 
multilateral and bilateral forums and to strongly challenge the contention that 
sugar is a ‘sensitive’ product. 
4 The world sugar market and Australia’s position in that market are discussed in Chapter 3. 
5 The NY11 is traded on the New York Board of Trade. The contract is a deliverable futures contract 
(albeit involving small quantities), with deliveries accepted from 28 sugar-producing countries. The 
contract is recognised as a world benchmark for freely traded raw sugar prices. 
6 The definition of a ‘sensitive product’ is currently being negotiated in the World Trade Organisation. 
A sensitive product can be nominated on the basis of economic, political or social reasons to sanction 
slower phased reductions in trade barriers (tariffs) than those that apply to other goods and services. 
Countries will be able to nominate a certain percentage of their tariff item lines as sensitive products.

- 6 - 
Leadership 
Most of Australia’s sugar industry has been legislated and regulated for almost 
100 years, and this statutory regime is being dismantled relatively quickly. Many 
industry participants find it difficult to recognise the benefits of deregulation. As the 
Chairman of the Productivity Commission, Gary Banks, observed in 2005: 
Structural reforms have long been recognised as economically desirable by most 
economists, but have faced strong political obstacles in all countries. This reflects the 
fact that many of the policies or regulations that have efficiency costs also have 
pronounced distributional effects. Reform (by definition) is intended to benefit the 
wider community. But in doing so it typically threatens the privileges or perceived 
entitlements of a minority, the members of which individually have more at stake – and 
thus more incentive to be politically active – than the often diffuse beneficiaries.7 
Deregulation of the industry has removed the requirement for the representative 
organisations to obtain industry-specific legislative amendments to alter commercial 
activity through political patronage; nevertheless, traditional attitudes are difficult to 
change. Services provided by the representative organisations are likely to assume 
greater importance than lobbying in the future. The representative organisations will 
presumably be reviewing their appropriateness, efficiency and effectiveness in a 
market-responsive environment.  
Leadership is essential in disseminating the principles of reform and restructure 
throughout the industry. The IOG considers that a comprehensive leadership group 
which has a holistic view of the value chain is needed to provide advice on 
implementation of key industry priorities and to foster a new culture within the 
industry, based on commercial relationships.  
Appointment or election does not, of itself, necessarily imply leadership skills.  
Recommendation 2 
group for the sugar and sugarcane-derived products industry. This group would 
be commercially focused, with membership from Australia’s sugar and 
sugarcane-derived products industry as well as non-industry members. The 
group, having regard for the deliberations of the Regional Advisory Groups, 
would advise the Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry on 
implementation of key industry priorities. 
Regional Advisory Groups  
The reform and restructure of the industry is challenging long-term processes because 
of the complexity of the value chain and the consequences of change for all 
stakeholders. The implementation of reform and restructure will require mentoring of 
7 Banks, G. (2005), Structural reform Australian style: lessons for others?, Presentation delivered to 
the International Monetary Fund and World Bank (United States, 26–27 May) and Organisation for 
Economic Cooperation and Development (France, 31 May).

- 7 - 
industry participants and coordination and liaison with local governments and 
regional communities. 
The IOG considers the Regional Advisory Groups (RAGs) are the appropriate vehicle 
to drive reform and restructure of the industry and ensure that community and 
industry expectations are taken into account in achieving viability and sustainability. 
The IOG recognises the importance of the RAGs having appropriate leadership and 
skills to undertake these priorities and implement regional plans. 
Recommendation 3 
necessary leadership and commercial skills to facilitate the implementation of 
regional plans, and are appropriately resourced. 
Achieving industry reform 
The Hildebrand Report into Australia’s sugar industry observed that, to a significant 
extent, each region and/or mill area needed to identify its own specific requirements 
and best solutions.8  
The IOG supports the regional/mill area concept as the appropriate mechanism for 
implementing reform. The RAGs were established on the basis of the regional and/or 
mill area concept, and prepared regional plans to identify the key challenges facing 
the sugar industry and the community at the local level, and the most appropriate 
solutions, reflecting the unique circumstances of each region. The IOG considers that 
the RAGs are the appropriate vehicle to develop the ongoing regional and/or mill area 
concept. However, each RAG needs the support of its local stakeholders and 
community to capture the benefits of reform and restructure, to achieve viability and 
sustainability, at the regional and/or mill area level. 
In achieving the goals of viability and sustainability the IOG considers that: 
• A viable (at AUD250 per tonne of raw sugar) raw sugar and/or sugarcane-derived 
products industry needs sufficient income to cover, on a properly costed basis, 
based upon a five-year average of adequate earnings, after taking into account 
compound inflation: 
• cash costs, including labour 
• aggregate net return on investment (less depreciation)  
• re-investment 
• debt servicing (as applicable) 
• reasonable living standards for participants 
• conditions that encourage the younger generation to stay in the industry or 
attract new participants. 
8 Hildebrand, C. (2002b), Independent assessment of the sugar industry, report to the Hon. Warren 
Truss MP, Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry. A short history of Australia’s sugar 
industry, the level of statutory regulation of the industry and the chronology leading up to the Sugar 
Industry Reform Programme 2004 is provided in Chapter 5.

- 8 - 
On average, returns need to be at a level to produce a ‘normal’ profit from 
activities. The cyclical freely traded raw sugar market will periodically generate 
‘super-normal’ profits for Australia’s industry.  
• Sustainability is viability on a long-term self-reliant basis. The industry is sustainable if 
it can maintain viability for successive phases of the cycle. 
The IOG recognises that each region faces different circumstances with its own range 
of opportunities, constraints and potential solutions. Nevertheless, in order for the 
industry to be viable and sustainable there is a need to reconfigure the industry to 
streamline the value chain, exploit existing technology and seek and adopt new 
technology to reduce costs.  
Regional plans developed by the RAGs propose a number of measures to potentially 
reduce costs and streamline the value chain.9 The IOG considers that the regional 
plans are living documents that require ongoing review and refinement. The future 
belongs to those who plan for it.  
Recommendation 4 
The industry, through the Regional Advisory Groups, strongly supports the 
regional and/or mill area business concept as the appropriate mechanism to 
achieve industry reform. 
and 
The industry effectively and expeditiously implements regional plans to achieve 
viability and sustainability.  
Self-reliance in the industry 
The volatility of commodity markets means reserves need to be built and retained 
during upturns, for re-investment and to mitigate downturns. Industry participants 
volatility, such as Farm Management Deposits.  
The present cyclically higher prices for the 2006 and 2007 seasons provide an 
excellent opportunity for the industry to reduce and/or eliminate debt and preserve 
what could be described as ‘super-normal’ profits to re-invest and to draw on during a 
downturn in the cycle. A collective assessment of how these reserves could be built 
and held requires serious consideration. It is clear that governments can no longer be 
expected to be a provider of assistance in cyclical downturns – nor should they. 
9 The key points raised in the regional plans are highlighted in Chapter 2.

- 9 - 
Recommendation 5 
The industry, through Regional Advisory Groups, in consultation with the 
taxation regime, devises new financial mechanisms to build capital reserves, 
notwithstanding the difficulties of differing ownership structures and tax 
considerations.  
and 
The industry fully utilises existing mechanisms, such as Farm Management 
Deposits, to assist industry participants to manage financial risk. 
Reform and restructure of Australia’s sugar industry 
To achieve the IOG Vision the industry needs to reform. This entails a fundamental 
change to a new ‘cultural’ paradigm that achieves real long-term economic benefits. 
This reform would include changes to the soft infrastructure of the industry, such as: 
streamlining the corporate and legal frameworks of the value chain and developing 
the capacity of the industry to manage cyclical market volatility; adopting advanced 
information technologies to optimise the efficiency of the value chain; developing 
human capital so that the industry has the skills to be self-reliant and effectively 
manage its future; and investing in intellectual capital and intellectual property to 
optimise the benefits of technology for the industry. These reforms should extend to 
all the participants in the sugar industry’s value chain. The necessary prerequisite for 
the implementation of these reforms is the industry’s acceptance of a future, without 
sector-specific legislation, which allows economic signals to flow along the value 
chain to ensure there is a proper response to real costs and prices. 
The historic, often adversarial, relationship between growers and millers, some of 
which stems from the precedent of arbitrated decisions, appears a significant barrier to 
reform within the industry. However, the relationship between sugarcane growers and 
millers is important. There is more interdependence between the sugarcane-growing 
sector and the sugarcane-milling sector than in many other agricultural business 
relationships, for various reasons. In moving towards deregulation, relationships 
within the industry need to be based on commercial principles and an accurate 
knowledge of where costs and efficiencies lie throughout the value chain. This could 
lead to a reduction in costs and to different methods of pricing for various stages in 
the value chain. 
Restructuring is the comprehensive appraisal and improvement of the fundamental 
commercial relationships and corporate structures that form the sugar industry’s value 
chain, with the intention of enhancing the industry’s domestic production efficiencies 
and its competitiveness as a participant in the cyclically volatile freely traded raw 
sugar market. 
Restructuring needs industry-wide change to ensure optimal and reliable 
(critical mass) supply of cane to mills, through fundamental improvements to long-run 
costs throughout the value chain.

- 10 - 
This improvement to long-run costs needs to occur before there is a price downturn – 
it is difficult to predict the length of the current cycle. There is a long-term downward 
trend in real prices for raw sugar and all costs need to be continually reviewed and 
adjusted for Australia’s industry to attempt to equal the cost of production of the 
market leader, Brazil, and achieve and maintain viability.  
Costs can be managed through the following: 
i. Managed scale – The growing of sugarcane in Australia is predominately 
undertaken by owner-operated small-scale farming enterprises. Economies of 
scale that can be generated by increasing the operating size of an enterprise are a 
key to unlocking improvements in the long-run unit cost of production in the sugar 
industry. Economies of scale are usually obtained through growth or acquisition. 
Managed scale provides a less structured alternative and allows sugarcane growers 
to achieve the cost profile of a larger economic entity without requiring changes of 
ownership. This can be achieved by enterprises acting in concert through 
cooperation, unincorporated and incorporated joint ventures, share-farming 
arrangements, joint management agreements, farming consortia, or by developing 
an operating structure unique to a group of sugarcane farmers that allows them to 
act economically as a larger enterprise and reduce the long-run unit cost of 
production for all members of the group. The prolific number of farming 
enterprises below 15 000 tonnes provides the opportunity to capture benefits from 
economies of scale through managed scale.  
ii. Adopt new and exploit existing technology – Throughout its history, the 
industry has adopted new technology – mechanisation and improved agronomic 
practices are obvious examples – which has made incremental improvements to 
productivity. However, the adoption of new technologies to achieve significant 
real productivity gains is essential for the industry to remain competitive. 
Managed scale and adoption of new technology are linked. Enterprises that have 
managed scale will usually have the resources to adopt new technology.  
iii. Real productivity gains – The costs of inputs generally increase over time. To 
counter this increase in costs, real productivity gains are needed. 
Real productivity gains are achieved from the application of inputs to create: 
• increased output from the same use of inputs 
• the same output from decreased use of inputs 
or 
• a greater rate of increase in output relative to the rate of increase in inputs. 
The industry is encouraged to continue to implement productivity improvements 
through the adoption of existing technology and new technology, and also through 
investment in human capital. 
iv. Specific attention to harvesting and transport in the value chain – About 
30 per cent of the costs in the value chain are associated with the harvesting and 
transport of sugarcane. There appear to be inefficiencies embedded in these 
components of the value chain. Partially this is a result of the divided 
responsibility for harvesting and transport. The costs of harvesting are the 
growers’ responsibility and the costs of transport rest with the mills. It is

- 11 - 
important for the RAGs and industry to fully identify and resolve the segregation 
of costs for these elements within a region and/or mill area, to increase efficiency 
in the value chain.  
v. Seeking and developing diversification opportunities of industry significance 
(step-outs): Contrary to commonly held views, genuine diversification options of 
industry-wide significance are limited at this time. Nevertheless, the development 
of diversified sugarcane products will be important to the long-term sustainability 
of the industry, if these products generate additional revenue without transferring 
costs to other segments of the value chain.  
Restructuring requires: 
i. Efficient and effective application of capital – Much of the infrastructure, plant 
and equipment throughout the sugar industry is aging and apart from maintenance 
and some refurbishment, there is little evidence of significant modernisation. 
Exploiting existing technology and seeking and adopting new technology to achieve 
real productivity gains requires capital, as do value adding and diversification. 
In the global society there is keen competition for capital, which is attracted to the 
best propositions. Old and mature businesses have less appeal than dynamic, growth 
businesses. Clearly there is a need for capital investment in the industry – the issue 
is how a self-reliant, mature industry can attract, raise and service the new capital. 
Nations, businesses and individuals self-generate capital through savings. Savings 
(reserves) are necessary to fund future growth.  
Industry participants need to make wise capital investment decisions, to facilitate 
restructuring, during the current cyclically high prices for freely traded raw sugar. 
Individuals need to make informed decisions about the level of reserve that may be 
necessary and the appropriate allocation of funds during this period.  
ii. Improved commercial understanding and skills in the industry, and a better 
understanding by the industry of market signals, customer needs and costs 
throughout the value chain – The IOG acknowledges that there are businesses 
within the industry that have a sound understanding of commercial frameworks that 
should succeed in a deregulated trading environment. However, it appears that there 
are industry participants who have not fully developed their business management 
skills to respond to market and pricing signals for commercial activity across a 
range of sectors as the industry has moved toward deregulation. As the industry 
moves towards deregulation there is a need for improved commercial and business 
skills.

- 12 - 
Recommendation 6 
The industry, through the Regional Advisory Groups, implements the following 
priorities as a matter of urgency: 
a. Reform 
i. Adopt the principle of operating as an industry without 
sector-specific legislation. 
ii. Adopt the principle of allowing cost signals to flow to ensure 
there is a proper response to real costs and prices within the 
value chain.  
b. Restructuring to ensure optimal and reliable (critical mass) supply of cane to 
mills through fundamental improvements to long-run costs throughout the value 
chain, to be achieved by: 
i. effective managed scale 
ii. exploitation of existing and adoption of new technology 
iii. real productivity gains 
iv. specific attention to harvesting and transport in the value chain 
v. seeking and developing diversification opportunities of 
industry significance (step-outs).  
and complemented by: 
i. efficient and effective application of capital 
ii. improved commercial understanding and skills in the industry  
iii. a better understanding by the industry of market signals, 
customer needs and costs throughout the value chain. 
Industry structures 
Tensions between growers and millers have been reflected in the institutional 
structures within the industry, sometimes duplicating functions and embedding 
additional costs within the value chain. 
The removal of vesting in relation to marketing arrangements for sugar from 
1 January 2006 will trigger the parties involved to review the arrangement between 
Queensland Sugar Limited and Sugar Terminals Limited. Applying a regional and/or 
mill area concept to industry operations may lead to an evaluation and possible 
change in the use of respective terminals. The industry will have to address the issue 
of access to terminals, and the cost of access will need to be addressed under the new 
commercial environment. 
The IOG believes that effective research, development and extension activity is 
fundamental to improved industry viability in the medium to long term. It appears 
there are an abundance of actual and potential service providers. However, it is less 
clear whether there has been sufficient or efficient delivery of services. Industry 
organisations and participants need to positively engage in the rationalisation of

- 13 - 
research providers, with the objective of efficient delivery of research outcomes from 
a commercially realistic funding model.  
In addition, there is some concern that, in the competition for finite financial 
resources, funds for long-term basic research are becoming relatively scarce. Funding 
for frontier research projects should continue to be made available if the industry is to 
improve the commercial viability of genuine diversification into sugarcane-derived 
products (step-outs).  
Recommendation 7 
The industry, in association with the proposed leadership advisory group, drives 
the review of the appropriateness, efficiency and effectiveness of industry 
structures and their relevance in a deregulated, commercial environment. 
Review should ensure every decision should seek the addition of real value to the 
industry. At present the structures fall into two groups: 
a. industry-linked organisations which are currently engaged in providing 
services (for example, Queensland Sugar Limited and Sugar Terminals 
Limited) 
b. research, development and extension organisations (including the Sugar 
Research and Development Corporation, Bureau of Sugar Experiment 
Stations Limited, Sugar Research Institute and others). 
The industry representative organisations will, presumably, continue to review 
their roles in light of the changing environment. 
Domestic benchmarking 
Identifying the break-even cost of production in any enterprise is vital. It appears that 
many in the industry have not fully segmented their costs to determine the true cost of 
production at their place in the value chain.  
To assist the restructure of Australia’s sugar industry it is important that industry 
participants are capable of assessing the performance of their business. To enable 
benchmarking and measurement of productivity improvements domestically it is 
necessary to have relevant and accurate commercial intelligence.  
Recommendation 8 
As a matter of urgency, the industry in association with the Regional Advisory 
Groups undertakes comprehensive surveys of industry business practices and 
costs to allow for domestic industry benchmarking.  
International benchmarking 
In addition to understanding the domestic cost of production, it is important for the 
industry to understand the capacity and capability of competitors and factors affecting 
the world market for raw sugar.

- 14 - 
Australia’s raw sugar exported to the freely traded raw sugar market is a commodity, 
and the industry does not have the ability to influence the price. An understanding of 
the production capabilities and costs of major competitors is fundamental to 
anticipating future supply and demand in the freely traded raw sugar market.  
It is also important to have an understanding of the products competing with sugar. 
Preferences of consumers have an effect on demand for sugar. The increasing concern 
about the rising incidence of obesity and other medical conditions, such as diabetes, is 
impacting adversely on sugar consumption, particularly in developed countries. This 
concern is leading to a growing promotion of alternative, low-calorie sweeteners, and 
may become a factor affecting the market for sugar.10  
Furthermore, there is a point of view expressed that derivatives markets – such as the 
NY11 – may be overly influenced by speculative investors. A better understanding of 
supply and demand fundamentals and the long-term movement in prices determined 
by derivative markets may assist in making informed decisions throughout the 
industry.  
Recommendation 9 
The appropriate organisations undertake international monitoring and 
evaluation, with particular reference to Brazil and major competitors. This 
monitoring and evaluation should provide appropriate market intelligence and 
ongoing monitoring of the international market place so that Australia’s 
industry is better able to position itself for competitiveness. 
Diversification 
The regional plans confirm the industry will be raw sugar dependent in the medium 
term at least. The industry must initially address efficiency improvements that may 
accrue from exploitation of existing technology. The capacity to move to a lower cost 
of production through new products is limited in the near term, because proposed new 
products require further research to fully develop sound business cases.  
Recommendation 10 
Given the limited diversification opportunities of industry significance, the 
industry, with the leadership advisory group and the members of the Regional 
Advisory Groups, undertakes a comprehensive scoping study to seek realistic 
and commercial diversification and value-adding opportunities (step-outs) that 
have broad applicability across the industry.  
10 These issues are further discussed in Chapter 3.

- 15 - 
CHAPTER 1 – ISSUES, REFORM IMPLEMENTATION 
AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
Purpose 
To summarise and analyse the issues affecting Australia’s sugar industry together 
with the recommendations of the Industry Oversight Group (IOG) to address and, 
where possible, resolve these issues against the following priorities in the IOG’s terms 
of reference: 
• implementation of sugar industry reform, including the refinement of reform 
priorities  
• development of a strategic industry vision  
• alignment of regional plans with that vision 
• provision of advice to the Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry on 
reform priorities. 
The industry and the market cycle 
The industry in brief 
Australia’s sugar industry is located in three states. In many respects the three discrete 
geographical areas can be regarded as three different ‘businesses’.11  
The Queensland industry is predominately focused on the raw sugar export market.  
The New South Wales industry is primarily focused on the domestic refined white 
sugar market. The Western Australian industry, near the Ord River, exports raw sugar 
to an associated company within a larger corporate structure in Indonesia.  
The market cycle 
The future viability and sustainability of Australia’s sugar industry is inextricably tied 
to volatile cycles of the freely traded world raw sugar market. Australia is essentially 
an exporter of a simply transformed commodity (that is, a raw material for processing 
before final consumption), raw sugar. The export prices received are determined by 
the market, which is cyclical – the price increases and decreases with regularity – and, 
as for most other agricultural commodities, there is a long-term downward trend in 
real terms. 
Commodity cycles occur due to the dynamics of world market demand and world 
market supply of sugar. World demand is growing, mainly driven by consumption 
rising from a low base in developing and less-developed countries, because of 
population increases and income growth. Supply is more complex, determined by 
factors such as seasonal world agribusiness dynamics and government interventions. 
The raw sugar market reconciles demand and supply by adjusting prices and, over 
time, a world price cycle is generated. 
The commodity price cycle has to be referenced against the cost structure of 
Australia’s industry. The IOG used a raw sugar pool price equivalent of 
$250 Australian Dollars (AUD250) per tonne as a basis for planning purposes to test 
the industry’s viability and sustainability, because Brazil (the major competitor on the 
11 The current status of Australia’s industry, including its organisational structure and positioning 
within Australia’s agriculture sector, is described in Chapter 5.

- 16 - 
world market) has demonstrated it can viably operate and expand at that value, given 
a constant relative exchange rate between the Brazilian Real (BRL) and the 
United States Dollar (USD). This is discussed further on pages 18 and 19. When the 
world price cycle for raw sugar generates a pool price equivalent in Australia of 
AUD250 per tonne, many participants within the industry are not viable. The industry 
is sustainable if it can maintain viability through successive cycles. 
Australia’s sugar industry is currently experiencing escalating prices for its raw sugar 
exports. This should be recognised as a phase within a cycle and represents a 
commodity ‘price bubble’ and not a longer term trend towards higher prices. 
The commodity cycle will turn down (the ‘price bubble’ will burst) and may be 
followed by a pronounced deterioration in prices, of prolonged duration, because the 
response to high prices will include: 
• increased supply of raw sugar by producer countries 
• contracting demand by consumers 
• substitution of sugar by artificial and other sweeteners 
• accelerated structural changes, as Brazil brings additional planned production on 
to the market 
• dietary changes away from sugar in middle-class societies. 
Australia’s raw sugar export industry is more exposed to the highly volatile world 
market than its competitors are, and must reform and restructure by adopting 
measures to manage this exposure. They include: 
• achieving cost efficiencies throughout the value chain 
• diversifying through ‘step-outs’ which have the potential to generate sufficient 
additional revenue streams to offset the effect of cyclically deteriorating sugar 
prices 
• accumulating reserves, when ‘super-normal’ profits accrue to Australia’s industry, 
to be drawn upon when revenues do not cover costs, including through the use of 
statutory measures such as taxation-effective deposit schemes. 
Industry diversification so far has not been sufficient to offset the effects of cyclical 
price volatility and off-farm incomes already subsidise the operation of many smaller 
scale sugarcane enterprises. A summary of the issue of off-farm income is provided at 
Appendix F. 
The industry should therefore develop a robust management culture that encourages 
enterprises and participants to segregate super-normal profits during the highly 
favourable phases of the commodity cycle, to provide: 
• funding to recapitalise the industry 
• an opportunity to retire embedded debt 
• a contingency reserve to support the industry during periods when deteriorating 
cyclical prices cannot sustain ‘normal’ profits. 
These reserves must be liquid and reviewed periodically for adequacy, taking account 
of structural changes that may influence the volatility of the cycles in the freely traded 
raw sugar world market.

- 17 - 
The trading environment of the world sugar market  
The global trade in sugar (raw and white) is comprised of two distinct markets – the 
‘freely traded raw sugar market’ and the ‘managed market’.12 The opportunity to trade 
freely is critical to Australia’s, and particularly Queensland’s, raw sugar industry. 
Australia exports in excess of 80 per cent of its raw sugar production to the freely 
traded market. The exception is the very small amount exported to the United States 
market through a quota. 
Australia’s sugar is priced against the benchmark for the freely traded raw sugar 
market, the New York Board of Trade Raw Sugar Futures Contract Number 11 
(NY11). This contrasts with a number of other countries, in which sugar is priced 
mainly in the managed market and the freely traded raw sugar market largely 
functions as a residual market. Government interventions in the managed market often 
result in excess production which is sold into the freely traded raw sugar market, often 
at less than ‘fair market value’. Therefore, the real costs of government interventions 
in the managed market are transferred to the freely traded raw sugar market, 
increasing price volatility.  
Access to markets, domestic support and export subsidies are commonly known as the 
‘three pillars’ for trade reform in world agricultural trade negotiations. These issues 
particularly apply to sugar. 
Most countries have domestic subsidies and/or apply trade barriers to protect their 
industries, and promote a case that sugar is a ‘sensitive product’. The definition of a 
‘sensitive product’ is currently being negotiated in the World Trade Organisation. A 
sensitive product can be nominated on the basis of economic, political or social 
reasons to sanction slower phased reductions in trade barriers (tariffs) than those that 
apply to other goods and services. Countries will be able to nominate a certain 
percentage of their tariff item lines as sensitive products. Such practices do not 
support flexibility, innovation and efficient allocation of resources. It is the strong 
contention of Australia’s sugar industry that sugar should be treated equally and fairly 
alongside all other goods, services and agricultural products, and not be designated as 
‘sensitive’. 
multilateral and bilateral forums. From Australia’s sugar industry perspective, the key 
issue that needs to be pursued through these negotiations is market access. 
countries’ government policies and interventions from distorting the world market.  
Recommendation 1 
multilateral and bilateral forums and to strongly challenge the contention that 
sugar is a ‘sensitive’ product. 
12 The world sugar market and Australia’s position in that market are discussed in Chapter 3.

- 18 - 
The market leader 
Brazil has expanded to become the world’s dominant sugarcane producer and sugar 
exporter, and has a significant effect on the supply of sugar to the freely traded raw 
sugar market. Australia does not have a significant effect on the supply of raw sugar 
to the freely traded market, despite exporting in excess of 80 per cent of its raw sugar 
production. Due in large part to economies of scale and verticality, Brazil has 
achieved a low cost of production in its sugarcane and sugarcane-derived products 
industry.13  
Anecdotal reports indicate the average cost of production of raw sugar in Brazil in 
early 2006 is in the order of 8 US cents to 9 US cents per pound, given an exchange 
rate of about USD1 per BRL2.60. The established high-volume and efficient sugar 
enterprises in Brazil produce significant output and are believed to have a cost of 
production in the range of 7 US cents to 8 US cents per pound.14 These lower costs of 
production must be taken into account as they are likely to be the benchmark for 
investors in Brazil’s sugar industry. Investors continued to support expansion of 
Brazil’s industry when prices indicated by the NY11 were around 7 US cents per 
pound. 
The key message is that sugar producers who compete in the freely traded raw sugar 
market must restructure their operations to match Brazil’s costs of production. Table 1 
provides a ‘ready reckoner’ to identify the value in Australian dollars that the industry 
needs to target to match Brazil’s extrapolated cost of production of raw sugar at 
constant USD–BRL exchange rates. 
Table 1: Raw sugar values in Australia (AUD) 
US cents per pound 
USD/
AUD 
6.00 
7.00 
8.00 
9.00 
10.00 
11.00 
12.00 
13.00 
0.60 
220 
257 
294 
331 
367 
404 
441 
478 
0.65 
204 
237 
271 
305 
339 
373 
407 
441 
0.70 
189 
220 
252 
283 
315 
346 
378 
409 
0.75 
176 
206 
235 
265 
294 
323 
353 
382 
0.80 
165 
193 
220 
248 
276 
303 
331 
358 
If a notional exchange rate is assumed to be USD0.75 per AUD1, the cost of 
production in Australia that matches Brazil’s average costs of 7 US cents to 
9 US cents per pound ranges from AUD206 to AUD265. The regional plans 
developed by the Regional Advisory Groups (RAGs) indicate that Australia’s sugar 
industry has a significant number of participants that are not viable at a raw sugar 
price of about AUD250 per tonne (and, in some cases, substantially higher).  
13 An outline of the scale of Brazil’s sugar industry, the government policies that encouraged sugarcane 
production in Brazil, the potential for further industry expansion and an indication of the intrinsic value 
of sugar production to Brazil’s economy are described in Chapter 4. 
14 Isaias de Carvalho Macedo (ed) (2005), Sugarcane’s energy – twelve studies on Brazilian sugarcane 
agribusiness and its suitability, São Paulo Sugar Cane Agroindustry Union

- 19 - 
It is difficult to forecast movements in the exchange rate. However, it is unlikely that 
the scale of Australia’s mineral resource reserves and indicator interest rates will be 
overlooked by currency traders. It would be prudent to consider that the value of 
Australia’s currency could appreciate towards USD0.80 per AUD1. At this exchange 
rate Brazil’s equivalent average cost of production is below AUD250. The anticipated 
equivalent cost of production for Brazil’s established high-volume and efficient sugar 
producers at this USD/AUD exchange rate needs careful consideration. 
Vision for Australia’s sugar industry 
In early 2006, Australia’s sugar industry has a forecast annual production of 
approximately 38 million tonnes of sugarcane, making it less than one tenth of the 
current size of Brazil’s expanding industry. In addition, Australia’s industry is 
generally water-constrained or landlocked, with attendant environmental issues to 
manage.  
The IOG has been tasked with enunciating a vision for the sugar industry to achieve 
its viability and sustainability. Assuming a raw sugar pool price equivalent of 
AUD250 per tonne (for the reasons outlined on page 15), the level of income that may 
be generated by the industry in its present structure is in broad terms insufficient for a 
viable industry. 
Australia’s local industry cannot influence the freely traded price of raw sugar – this 
is determined by the market. Australia’s industry can only respond by reducing its 
costs throughout the value chain to ensure viability.  
Australia’s sugar industry needs to be competitive in the world sugar market:  
• where other countries use domestic support mechanisms and trade policies to 
support their sugar industries 
• where surplus sugar produced under third countries’ domestic support 
mechanisms and distorting trade policies will be delivered to the freely traded 
market for raw sugar, increasing the volatility of cyclical prices 
• where there is a large, expanding competitor that dominates supply to the world 
raw sugar market, which affects the world price for freely traded raw sugar 
• where, consistent with most other agricultural commodities, there is a long-term 
downward trend in real prices.  
The IOG urges Australia’s sugar industry to vigorously implement programmes for 
reform and restructure, to achieve viability and sustainability, during this period of 
cyclically high prices. 
The repeal of sugar industry specific legislation in Queensland should ensure that 
sugarcane producing regions and milling areas have commercial flexibility to execute 
these programmes for reform and restructure, taking advantage of the current 
cyclically high prices for freely traded raw sugar. 
The historic response of the industry had been to oppose deregulation. With staged 
deregulation, the response by some is to seek to maintain the structure and cultures of 
past regulation. Consequent preservation of practices and delays in adoption of

- 20 - 
innovative approaches has impeded the industry’s drive for international 
competitiveness. Some industry participants find it difficult to move away from past 
cultures. The industry requires a cultural shift to develop flexibility to respond to 
market forces and become self-reliant.  
The IOG Vision for the sugar industry is 
IOG Vision 
A commercially vibrant, sustainable and self-reliant raw sugar and 
sugarcane-derived products industry, through: 
• committed cane growers and millers being responsive to international and 
domestic market forces; and  
• operating in an open, deregulated industry environment, within 
Australia’s corporate governance framework. 
Leadership 
Most of Australia’s sugar industry has been legislated and regulated for almost 100 
years and this statutory regime is being dismantled relatively quickly. Many industry 
participants find it difficult to recognise the benefits of deregulation. As the Chairman 
of the Productivity Commission, Gary Banks, observed in 2005: 
Structural reforms have long been recognised as economically desirable by most 
economists, but have faced strong political obstacles in all countries. This reflects the 
fact that many of the policies or regulations that have efficiency costs also have 
pronounced distributional effects. Reform (by definition) is intended to benefit the 
wider community. But in doing so it typically threatens the privileges or perceived 
entitlements of a minority, the members of which individually have more at stake – and 
thus more incentive to be politically active – than the often diffuse beneficiaries.15 
Grower and miller organisations were established to represent stakeholders when the 
industry was regulated through state legislation. The organisations were formed under 
a culture that encouraged and required political patronage to service legislative 
requirements which governed commercial activity.  
Deregulation of the industry has removed the requirement for the representative 
organisations to obtain industry-specific legislative amendment to alter commercial 
activity; nevertheless, traditional attitudes are difficult to change.  
Services provided by the representative organisations are likely to assume greater 
importance than lobbying in the future. The representative organisations will 
presumably be reviewing their appropriateness, efficiency and effectiveness in a 
market responsive environment.  
Leadership is essential in disseminating the principles of reform throughout the 
industry. The IOG considers that a comprehensive leadership group which has a 
15 Banks 2005.

- 21 - 
holistic view of the value chain is needed to provide advice on implementation of key 
industry priorities and foster a new culture within the industry, based on commercial 
relationships. 
Appointment or election does not, of itself, necessarily imply leadership skills. 
Recommendation 2 
group for the sugar and sugarcane-derived products industry. This group would 
be commercially focused, with membership from Australia’s sugar and 
sugarcane-derived products industry as well as non-industry members. The 
group, having regard for the deliberations of the Regional Advisory Groups, 
would advise the Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry on 
implementation of key industry priorities. 
Regional Advisory Groups  
The reform and restructure of the industry is challenging long-term processes because 
of the complexity of the value chain and the consequences of change for all 
stakeholders. The implementation of reform and restructure will require mentoring of 
industry participants and coordination and liaison with local governments and 
regional communities. 
The IOG considers that the Regional Advisory Groups (RAGs) will need to provide 
effective leadership to engage the industry at the regional level and/or mill area level 
to implement regional plans. This leadership should be enhanced by each RAG having 
the capacity and capability to assess the commercial impact along the value chain 
within its region or mill area. The issues that must be addressed in restructuring the 
industry require sound commercial judgement to be exercised within the regions. 
The RAG is the appropriate vehicle to drive reform and restructure of the industry and 
ensure that community and industry expectations are fully taken into account in 
achieving viability and sustainability. The IOG recognises the importance of the 
RAGs having appropriate leadership and skills to undertake these priorities and 
implement regional plans. 
Recommendation 3 
necessary leadership and commercial skills to facilitate the implementation of 
regional plans, and are appropriately resourced. 
Achieving industry reform 
The Hildebrand Report into Australia’s sugar industry observed that, to a significant 
extent, each region and/or mill area needed to identify its own specific requirements

- 22 - 
Australia’s sugar industry has encouraged active involvement from industry 
participants at the regional level and/or the mill area level.  
The adoption of a regional business approach to industry activities was a function of 
Regional Guidance Groups were not appointed during the Sugar Industry Reform 
Programme 2002. The IGG acknowledged that this inhibited the development of the 
regional business approach to industry activities described in the IGG Industry 
Reform Plan. 
As previously mentioned, the RAG is the appropriate vehicle to drive reform and 
restructure and ensure that community and industry expectations are fully taken into 
account in achieving viability and sustainability. The interdependence of sugarcane 
growers and millers has been recognised by the RAGs. The regional plans developed 
by the RAGs for the viability and sustainability of the industry have been based upon 
the regional and/or mill area concept.  
Australia’s sugar industry should benefit from planning at the regional and/or mill 
area level to ensure the viability and sustainability of sugar and, potentially, 
sugarcane-derived products. As previously mentioned, the IOG considers that the 
RAGs will be required to provide effective leadership to develop the ongoing regional 
and/or mill area concept for the benefit of the industry and the regional community. 
However, each RAG needs the support of its local stakeholders and community to 
capture the benefits of reform and restructure, to achieve viability and sustainability, 
at the regional and/or mill area level. 
In achieving the goals of viability and sustainability through reform and restructure 
the IOG considers that:  
• A viable (at AUD250 per tonne of raw sugar) raw sugar and/or sugarcane-derived 
products industry needs sufficient income to cover, on a properly costed basis, 
based upon a five-year average of adequate earnings, after taking into account 
compound inflation: 
• cash costs, including labour 
• aggregate net return on investment (less depreciation) 
• re-investment 
• debt servicing (as applicable) 
• reasonable living standards for participants 
• conditions that encourage the younger generation to stay in the industry or 
attract new participants. 
On average, returns need to be at a level to produce a ‘normal’ profit from 
activities. The cyclical freely traded raw sugar market will periodically generate 
‘super-normal’ profits for Australia’s industry.  
16 Hildebrand 2002b. A short history of Australia’s sugar industry, the level of statutory regulation of 
the industry and the chronology leading up to the Sugar Industry Reform Programme 2004 is provided 
in Chapter 5.

- 23 - 
• Sustainability is viability on a long-term self-reliant basis. The industry is 
sustainable if it can maintain viability for successive phases of the cycle.  
The sugar industry cannot be financially sustainable without being environmentally 
sustainable. The RAGs recognised that active management of environmental issues is 
imperative at the regional and mill area level. Regional plans have universally 
reflected an increased participation in self-regulation by industry participants to 
minimise the environmental impact of the regional sugar industry. The RAGs have a 
community responsibility to overview the implementation of best management 
practices across each region and/or mill area to integrate responsibility for 
environmental management throughout the value chain.  
The IOG recognises that each region faces different circumstances and its own range 
of opportunities, constraints and potential solutions. Nevertheless, in order for the 
industry to be viable and sustainable there is a need to reconfigure the industry to 
streamline the value chain and exploit existing technology to reduce costs. In addition, 
the industry must seek new technology to adopt in the future, to either reduce or keep 
in check costs in the value chain.  
In early 2006, the indicative AUD per tonne raw sugar returns in Australia, indicated 
by the NY11, had increased dramatically. These prices, if realised, would translate 
into ‘super-normal’ profits for viable enterprises in the industry. The duration of this 
cyclically high price is difficult to forecast and it is inevitable that the cycle will 
deteriorate and prices will decrease. Regional plans indicate there were still some 
enterprises which are not viable at AUD300 per tonne and, in some cases, at higher 
values. Of significance is the observation that 2003–04 prices were used as a cost base 
to assess enterprise data when the regional plans were developed. The prices of some 
inputs appear to have increased markedly above this cost base. Both price inflation 
and cost base inflation are dynamic and need to be considered with respect to time.  
Regional plans developed by the RAGs propose a number of measures to potentially 
reduce costs and streamline the value chain.17 The IOG considers that the regional 
plans are living documents that require ongoing review and refinement.  
Recommendation 4 
The industry, through the Regional Advisory Groups, strongly supports the 
regional and/or mill area business concept as the appropriate mechanism to 
achieve industry reform. 
and 
The industry effectively and expeditiously implements regional plans to achieve 
viability and sustainability.  
17 The key points raised in the regional plans are highlighted in Chapter 2.

- 24 - 
Self-reliance in the industry 
The volatility of commodity markets means reserves need to be built and retained 
during upturns, for re-investment and to cushion downturns. The present cyclically 
higher prices for the 2006 and 2007 seasons provide an excellent opportunity for the 
industry to reduce and/or eliminate embedded debt and preserve what could be 
described as ‘super-normal’ profits for re-investment, thus reducing current carrying 
costs of capital (interest and charges) and removing and/or reducing the burden of 
servicing costs for new investments. 
Given the various ownership structures (and taxation considerations) throughout the 
industry, a collective assessment of how these reserves could be built and held needs 
of assistance of up to AUD444.4 million and some state government assistance, it is 
clear that governments can no longer be expected to be a provider of assistance in 
cyclical downturns – nor should they. 
to manage income volatility which is caused by seasonal variability of output. 
Industry participants should fully utilise these existing mechanisms to manage 
financial risk. These mechanisms include Farm Management Deposits and 
income-averaging provisions. The industry should also draw on its reserves during a 
downturn in the cycle of the freely traded raw sugar market. 
Recommendation 5 
The industry, through Regional Advisory Groups, in consultation with the 
taxation regime, devises new financial mechanisms to build capital reserves, 
notwithstanding the difficulties of differing ownership structures and tax 
considerations.  
and 
The industry fully utilises existing mechanisms, such as Farm Management 
Deposits, to assist industry participants to manage financial risk. 
Reform and restructure 
Reform 
To achieve the IOG Vision the industry needs to reform.18 This entails a fundamental 
change to a new ‘cultural’ paradigm that achieves real long-term economic benefits. 
This reform would include changes to the soft infrastructure of the industry, such as: 
streamlining the corporate and legal frameworks of the value chain and developing 
the capacity of the industry to manage cyclical market volatility; adopting advanced 
information technologies to optimise the efficiency of the value chain; developing 
18 The current status of the industry, including its organisational structure and positioning within 
Australia’s agriculture sector, are described in Chapter 5.

- 25 - 
human capital so that the industry has the skills to be self-reliant and effectively 
manage its future; and investing in intellectual capital and intellectual property to 
optimise the benefits of technology for the industry. These reforms should extend to 
all the participants in the sugar industry’s value chain. The necessary prerequisite for 
the implementation of these reforms is the industry’s acceptance of a future, without 
sector-specific legislation, which allows economic signals to flow along the value 
chain to ensure there is a proper response to real costs and prices. 
Business relationships  
The needs of stakeholders in the sugarcane-producing sector of Australia’s sugar 
industry vary across regions, and in some cases across mill areas, for a number of 
reasons, including the various structures of mill ownership (cooperative, unlisted 
public company, listed public company and proprietary company). The historic, often 
adversarial, relationship between growers and millers, some of which stems from the 
precedent of arbitrated decisions, appears a significant barrier to reform within the 
industry.  
The relationship between sugarcane growers and millers is important. There is more 
interdependence between the sugarcane-growing sector and the sugarcane-milling 
sector of the industry than in many other agricultural business relationships. This 
greater interdependence derives from the limitations of transport of sugarcane, the 
associated costs and the reported deterioration of sugar as measured by commercial 
cane sugar content (CCS). These factors determine the optimal area and distance from 
which a mill may viably source sugarcane.  
Relationships within the industry need to be based on commercial principles.  
The principle of choice  
Under the historical approach to sugarcane supply a cane payment system was 
determined that linked the price of sugarcane to the price of raw sugar. There are 
some within the industry who believe that this means of establishing a value for 
sugarcane should extend to other sugarcane-derived products (diversification options).  
With progressive deregulation, the milling and growing sectors are able to approach 
sugarcane pricing linked to the value of sugarcane as a raw material for further 
processing. An option may be to contrast this with other agricultural industries where 
a producer accepts a farm gate price that represents the value to the purchaser of the 
product on the day. It is recognised that the purchaser of the raw material accepts all 
further risk. It is generally accepted that each side of the transaction will consider the 
raw material was either over-valued or under-valued on the day; nevertheless, such 
transactions continue to take place.  
There is an interdependence of a miller needing sugarcane and a sugarcane grower 
needing a mill in close proximity, although a sugar mill in itself provides only another 
land use option to a farm investor. The interdependence does not necessarily entail a 
sugarcane grower being involved once the cane has been delivered. It may suit a 
sugarcane grower to not be involved in sugar as such. It may appeal to some 
sugarcane growers to be suppliers of a raw material (sugarcane) only, assuming there 
is a counter party prepared to offer an acceptable price. In that case the sugarcane 
grower avoids the subsequent risks of world sugar price fluctuations, currency

- 26 - 
movements and so on. This is an option open to sugarcane growers and is an issue of 
choice. Legitimate commercial choice is fundamental in a deregulated environment. 
Equally, another option could be extended for the sugarcane grower to choose to be 
involved in further processing of sugarcane. A sugarcane grower could negotiate with 
a mill to toll crush sugarcane and trade the sugar in the market. This choice may only 
be truly effective provided the value chain can determine a market value for services 
and cost signals flow to ensure there is a proper response to real costs and prices.  
Restructure 
Restructuring is the comprehensive appraisal and improvement of the fundamental 
commercial relationships and corporate structures that form the sugar industry’s value 
chain, with the intention of enhancing the industry’s domestic production efficiencies 
and its competitiveness as a participant in the cyclically volatile freely traded raw 
sugar market. 
Restructuring to ensure optimal and reliable (critical mass) supply of cane to 
mills through fundamental improvements to long-run costs throughout the value 
chain 
There is an optimal and reliable critical mass of sugarcane required for milling. This 
critical mass depends on the size of the mill, the time that the milling assets are used 
for production, and the value (reflected in the price) obtained from raw sugar and/or 
sugarcane-derived products. This critical mass of sugarcane also needs to be within an 
optimal distance of the mill. 
There is a long-term downward trend in real prices for raw sugar, and all costs need to 
be continually reviewed and adjusted to achieve and maintain viability. Examining 
long-run average costs includes an assessment of both fixed costs (for example, land) 
and variable costs (for example, fuel) over time. For Australia’s industry to attempt to 
equal the cost of production of the market leader, Brazil, long-run costs need to be 
continually improved (reduced) throughout the value chain.  
Statutory costs  
A consideration in examining costs in the value chain is costs that are imposed on 
many industries by government-controlled organisations that supply public utilities, 
such as water, ports, electricity or transport. 
Adopting a user-pays approach appears to be an issue for some industry participants. 
This is demonstrated in the response to proposed increases in prices for utilities 
associated with cost recovery of assets. Generally, assets were constructed and funded 
by state governments at an earlier time. Although establishing a value for a product 
should lead to efficient use of the product in a market economy, the transition to user 
pays is unpalatable when the product was previously not fully costed in the production 
system.  
In early 2006, the sugar industry participants who access irrigation water are reacting 
negatively to the statutory weighted average cost of capital that is to be applied in the 
formulation of a user-pays approach to water resources.

- 27 - 
Managed scale 
The growing of sugarcane in Australia is predominately undertaken by 
owner-operated small-scale farming enterprises. This dominance can be seen in the 
sample of regional cane farm sizes in Table 2. Economies of scale that can be 
generated by increasing the operating size of an enterprise are a key to unlocking 
improvements in the long-run unit cost of production in the sugar industry. Economies 
of scale are usually obtained through growth or acquisition. Managed scale provides a 
less structured alternative and allows sugarcane growers to achieve the cost profile of 
a larger economic entity without requiring changes of ownership. This can be 
achieved by enterprises acting in concert through cooperation, unincorporated and 
incorporated joint ventures, share-farming arrangements, joint management 
agreements, farming consortia, or by developing an operating structure unique to a 
group of sugarcane farmers that allows them to act economically as a larger enterprise 
and reduce the long-run unit cost of production for all members of the group. 
Table 2: Number and proportion of farms in the Burdekin, Mackay and 
Bundaberg regions/mill areas, by farm output 
Farm output (tonnes of sugarcane) 
Region/mill area
1 to 
 5 000 
5 000 to  
15 000 
15 000 to  
40 000 
Greater than 
40 000 
Burdekin 
130 
22% 
292 
49% 
140 
23% 
37 
6% 
Mackay 
498 
42% 
534 
45% 
134 
10% 
4 
3% 
Bundaberg  
638 
79% 
135 
17% 
32 
4% 
5 
1% 
Source: Burdekin RAG, Mackay RAG, Bundaberg RAG 
There are, however, limits and constraints in ‘scale’ which must be taken into account 
when increasing the scale of sugarcane-farming enterprises. Australia’s east coast 
sugar industry is defined as ‘mature’. If it is not well managed, simply increasing the 
size of land and input capital may not generate a worthwhile reduction in average 
enterprise unit costs, and scale will have no benefits. 
The empirical long-run average cost (LAC) data and statistical information submitted 
with the regional plans indicates that generally worthwhile economies of scale are 
available to enterprises with an annual sugarcane production up to 15 000 tonnes 
(about 80 per cent of sugarcane farming enterprises). The prolific number of farming 
enterprises below 15 000 tonnes provides the opportunity to capture benefits from 
economies of scale through managed scale. That is, increasing the scale of these 
enterprises through management will allow each group of them to act as a bigger 
enterprise, which will reduce the average cost of production.  
Farms with production ranging from 15 000 to 35 000 tonnes per annum would need 
to carefully review technology to improve productivity and/or introduce new 
technology and quality management to achieve higher productivity, if lasting 
worthwhile reductions in the unit cost of production are to be achieved.  
For many mature industries, enterprises that exceed a threshold output need to 
comprehensively assess the potential benefits of increasing scale, because significant

- 28 - 
economies of scale will accrue only if a simultaneous productivity increase takes 
place. This will often require the introduction of new technology. 
Adopt new and exploit existing technology  
The industry has adopted new technology throughout its history – mechanisation and 
improved agronomic practices are obvious examples. However, the adoption of new 
technologies to achieve real productivity gains is essential for the industry to remain 
competitive. Effective managed scale and adoption of new technology are linked. 
Enterprises that have managed scale will usually have the resources to adopt new 
technology.  
Existing technologies appear to be making only incremental improvement, if any net 
improvement, to the productivity of the industry. Anecdotal reports during the 
regional planning process indicated that current productivity gains barely keep pace 
with inflation. However, the relationship between managed scale and adoption of 
technology may be a factor in these reports. The high number of participants 
operating enterprises below 15 000 tonnes of sugarcane per annum may be hindering 
the overall productivity of the industry. 
Although there are relatively few producers producing more than 15 000 tonnes of 
sugarcane per annum, these producers are providing a substantial proportion of the 
industry’s output. It is inferred from the lower LAC that these larger producers have 
the capacity to effectively harness technology to achieve productivity gains. In the 
long term, new technology and management practices will be required to move the 
industry to potentially lower costs of production.  
Real productivity gains 
The costs of inputs generally increase over time. To counter this increase in costs, real 
productivity gains are needed. 
Real productivity gains are achieved from the application of inputs to create: 
• increased output from the same use of inputs 
• the same output from decreased use of inputs 
or 
• a greater rate of increase in output relative to the rate of increase in inputs. 
One of the means of managing cost increases over time is the application of 
technology. The sugar industry appears to be achieving incremental productivity 
gains. The introduction and adoption of new technologies, such as biotechnologically 
modified (BM) sugarcane, may achieve substantial gains in productivity.  
Investment in human capital through education and training also assists to achieve 
real productivity gains.  
The industry is encouraged to continue to implement productivity improvements 
through the exploitation of existing technology and adoption of new technology, and 
also through investment in human capital.

- 29 - 
Harvesting and transport in the value chain 
About 30 per cent of costs in the value chain are associated with the harvesting and 
transport of sugarcane. There appear to be inefficiencies embedded in these 
components of the value chain. Partially this is a result of the divided responsibility 
for harvesting and transport. The costs of harvesting are a grower’s responsibility and 
the costs of transport rest with the mills. It is important for the RAGs and industry to 
fully identify and resolve the segregation of costs for these elements within a region 
and/or mill area, to increase efficiency in the value chain.  
The transport infrastructure in the Queensland industry is predominantly 
narrow-gauge rail, and is comprised of relatively high levels of capital investment 
albeit at substantially written down values. 
The declining proportion of land devoted to sugarcane production in some regions, 
and/or competition between mills seeking sufficient sugarcane to optimise throughput, 
has led to a ‘patchwork’ layout of cane farms within the established mill areas.19 In a 
region where sugarcane transport has developed around narrow-gauge railway 
systems the dilution and reduction in volume of sugarcane in the landscape increases 
the average cost of maintaining and operating the network per tonne of sugarcane 
transported. The patchwork effect is most evident between Mossman and Tully in the 
Far North Queensland region and within the Bundaberg region. 
Within the sugarcane-producing regions this patchwork has a flow-on effect to the 
spatial economics of sugarcane transport to sugar mills. The spatial economics of 
sugarcane transport are driven by two conflicting forces. On one side is the efficiency 
of transport, which is maximised by short distances travelled by high volumes of 
sugarcane. On the other side is the requirement for a sugar mill to obtain a sufficient 
reliable volume of sugarcane (critical mass) to sustain its operations. A more detailed 
discussion of issues surrounding transport in the value chain is provided at Appendix F. 
Sugarcane transported from the fringes of a production area to sustain critical mass of 
milling operations needs to contribute at least enough revenue for the transport and 
milling components of the value chain to meet the total of the real incremental costs 
incurred. The cane transport distance largely determines the real cost of cane transport 
and this does not vary with sugar price. Thus, as price falls in real terms, the net 
contribution of fringe-area production to sustaining critical mass can rapidly become 
negative. This can compound what may already be a difficult viability situation for 
milling in a region, as the limit of economic transport distance contracts.  
From the mill’s perspective the sugar produced from sourcing additional tonnage at 
the limit of efficient transport distance is justified, as it contributes to optimal mill 
supply and increases utilisation of the asset. 
The regional plans identified harvesting, together with its agronomic impacts, as the 
segment of the value chain with the greatest potential productivity gains. Capital, 
labour and farm layout combined contribute to harvesting inefficiencies. Some areas 
19 A discussion of the issues surrounding the loss of cane land to alternative use is at Appendix F.

- 30 - 
within regions are already showing benefits through reducing the number of 
harvesting units and optimising existing harvesting groups.  
It is apparent that the industry is aware of the issues surrounding harvest and 
transport, given the numerous studies conducted into transport logistics over decades. 
Implementation of the actions recommended by these studies appears to have been 
limited.  
Seeking and developing diversification opportunities of industry significance 
(step outs) 
Contrary to commonly held views, genuine diversification options of industry-wide 
significance are limited at this time. A summary of potential diversification 
opportunities for the sugar industry will be discussed later in this chapter. 
Nevertheless, the development of diversified sugarcane products will be important to 
the long-term sustainability of the industry, if these products generate additional 
revenue without transferring costs to other segments of the value chain.  
The low margins that are associated with commodity businesses generally require a 
high volume of production to achieve efficient use of capital. Common user assets, 
such as sugar terminals, generally become less cost efficient as the volume of 
production decreases. Diversification into new sugarcane-derived products that 
decrease the amount of sugar produced may lead to increased costs in the value chain 
for the sugar. The production of new sugarcane-derived products within a region or 
mill area will require consideration and examination, as this will have impacts upon 
raw sugar within the value chain. 
Efficient and effective application of capital  
The milling sector has a high level of fixed assets that are currently used for five to six 
months per year. Apart from maintenance and some refurbishment, there is little 
evidence of significant modernisation. Furthermore, no conventional milling plants 
have been built in Queensland in the past 80 years (Brazil has constructed many new 
mills – for sugar, sugar and ethanol, or ethanol production). 
The period of low prices led many in the milling sector to substantially write down the 
value of the assets, in some cases to land value. Accounting convention requires 
regular assessment of the ‘carrying value’ of assets – in short, the relativity of 
earnings to those assets. This is important in assessing true viability. Calculating 
earnings as a percentage of the value of assets can lead to a misconception of the 
earnings’ true value, if the assets are run down.  
As assessed in 2005, there had been little evidence of any worthwhile investment in 
farm machinery, in particular harvesting equipment, in the preceding five years.  
Changes in transport logistics in, and between, mill areas have left a number of 
transport assets stranded. In any case, the cane rail transport system, of approximately 
4 000 kilometres, is old. 
Exploiting existing technology and seeking and adopting new technology to achieve 
real productivity gains also requires capital, as do value adding and diversification.

- 31 - 
In the global society there is keen competition for capital, which will be attracted to 
the best propositions. Old and mature businesses have less appeal than dynamic, 
growth businesses. Clearly there is a need for capital investment in the industry – the 
issue is how a self-reliant, mature industry can attract, raise and service the new 
capital. 
Nations, businesses and individuals self-generate capital through savings. Savings 
(reserves) are necessary to fund future growth.  
Industry participants need to make wise capital investment decisions, to facilitate 
restructuring, during the current cyclically high prices for freely traded raw sugar. 
Individuals need to make informed decisions about the level of reserve that may be 
necessary and the appropriate allocation of funds during this period.  
As scale is considered to be one of the keys to making the value chain more efficient, 
access to capital may be an issue for those wishing to aggregate by purchasing. 
Generally, within Australia’s agricultural sector rural land values increase in response 
to commodity price increases. In addition, the provision of sectoral assistance 
packages may also have a flow-on affect upon rural land values, which should be 
considered when providing support for adjusting industries. These factors have been 
acknowledged as existing within the sugar industry by CANEGROWERS; as stated by 
Senior Manager – Policy, Benard Milford: 
low sugar price expectations in early 2004 depressed land prices to record low levels 
of around $3 999 per hectare. The provision of the Sugar Industry Reform Package 
and more buoyant sugar prices helped push farm sale prices up.20  
The decision to expand sugarcane production through purchase of land is likely to 
involve investing at a high point in the rural land price cycle. 
Improved commercial understanding and skills in the industry and a better 
understanding by the industry of market signals, customer needs and costs 
throughout the value chain  
The IOG acknowledges that there are businesses within the industry that have a sound 
understanding of commercial frameworks that should succeed in a deregulated trading 
environment. However, it appears that there are industry participants who have not 
fully developed their business management skills to respond to market and pricing 
signals for commercial activity across a range of sectors as the industry has moved 
toward deregulation. As the industry moves towards deregulation there is a need for 
improved commercial and business skills.  
The development of the industry appears to have historically been expanded by 
existing participants with available land, instead of admitting new businesses. 
Furthermore, the history of regulation of the sugar industry appears to have inhibited 
industry-wide active participation in decision making based upon commercial return 
throughout the value chain. It is acknowledged that in any commercial relationship 
perfect knowledge of each business’s cost and revenue structures is not normal – 
20 Milford, B. (2005), ‘Cane farm sales prices recover’, Australian Canegrower, 28 November 2005, 
vol 27, no. 24, p. 7

- 32 - 
although a general understanding of each others’ margins usually provides a basis for 
trading goods and services. The capacity to identify net margins to guide investment 
decisions has not been demonstrated as standard business practice throughout the 
industry. 
A sense of urgency is needed 
There is a large, expanding supplier that dominates supply in the world raw sugar 
market and affects the world price for freely traded raw sugar. The duration of the 
present cycle will be difficult to predict. Australia’s sugar industry needs to 
restructure urgently to reduce costs in the value chain before there is a price downturn.  
Recommendation 6 
The industry, through the Regional Advisory Groups, implements the following 
priorities as a matter of urgency: 
a. Reform 
i. Adopt the principle of operating as an industry without 
sector-specific legislation. 
ii. Adopt the principle of allowing cost signals to flow to ensure 
there is a proper response to real costs and prices within the 
value chain.  
b. Restructuring to ensure optimal and reliable (critical mass) supply of cane to 
mills through fundamental improvements to long-run costs throughout the value 
chain, to be achieved by: 
i. effective managed scale 
ii. exploitation of existing and adoption of new technology 
iii. real productivity gains 
iv. specific attention to harvesting and transport in the value chain 
v. seeking and developing diversification opportunities of 
industry significance (step-outs).  
and complemented by: 
i. efficient and effective application of capital 
ii. improved commercial understanding and skills in the industry  
iii. a better understanding by the industry of market signals, 
customer needs and costs throughout the value chain. 
Industry structures  
As previously mentioned, the historic, often adversarial, relationship between growers 
and millers appears a significant barrier to reform and restructure within the industry. 
These tensions have been reflected in the institutional structures within the industry, 
sometimes duplicating functions and imposing additional costs.

- 33 - 
The institutional structures may contribute to embedding costs within the value chain. 
It is perceived that there is an age (and gender) bias within the primary 
decision-making groups in the industry. Presumably, the institutions will review their 
roles to ensure that they are providing ‘real value add’ to the industry.  
The bulk sugar terminals located at the ports were not generally discussed within the 
regional plans although these assets are important within Australia’s sugar industry. 
For example, the removal of vesting in relation to marketing arrangements for sugar 
from 1 January 2006 will trigger the parties involved to review the arrangement 
between Queensland Sugar Limited and Sugar Terminals Limited (STL). STL was 
established as a company to transfer ownership of Queensland’s bulk sugar terminal 
assets and long-term leases to the growers and millers, as shareholders in the 
company. The growers and millers paid for the total cost of the terminals through 
deductions from various pool proceeds from all of Queensland’s production. These 
costs included storage of sugar for year-round supply.  
Applying a regional/mill area concept to industry operations may lead to an 
evaluation and possible change in the use of respective terminals. The industry will 
have to address the issue of access to terminals, and the cost of access will need to be 
addressed under the new commercial environment. Access to terminal facilities will 
require a commercial framework to identify a market price for access to the terminal 
facility that is mutually acceptable to negotiating parties. The prices charged for 
marketing and storage in terminals may change if the industry moves towards a 
region/mill area basis. 
The IOG observes that research and development, as opposed to extension at farm 
level, received little attention in the regional plans other than acknowledgment of the 
status quo. The service providers are individually undergoing restructure at the 
present time, in response to removal of secure (regulatory) funding, industry financial 
pressures and evolving government support priorities. A discussion of the funding 
interrelationships between the research, development and extension service providers 
is provided at Appendix F. The IOG believes that effective research, development and 
extension activity is fundamental to improved industry viability in the medium to long 
term. It commends to industry organisations and participants that they should be 
positively involved in the rationalisation of research providers, with the objective of 
efficient delivery of research outcomes from a commercially realistic funding model.  
While there would appear to be an abundance of actual and potential service 
providers, it is less clear, through measurable outcomes or through research and 
innovation uptake, that there has been sufficient or efficient delivery of services. 
Further, there is some concern that, in the competition for finite financial resources, 
funds for long-term basic research are becoming relatively scarce. Funding for 
frontier research projects should continue to be made available if the industry is to 
improve the commercial viability of genuine diversification into sugarcane-derived 
products (step-outs).

- 34 - 
Recommendation 7 
The industry, in association with the proposed leadership advisory group, drives 
the review of the appropriateness, efficiency and effectiveness of industry 
structures and their relevance in a deregulated, commercial environment. 
Review should ensure every decision should seek the addition of real value to the 
industry. At present the structures fall into two groups: 
a. industry-linked organisations which are currently engaged in providing 
services (for example, Queensland Sugar Limited and Sugar Terminals 
Limited) 
b. research, development and extension organisations (for example, the 
Sugar Research and Development Corporation, Bureau of Sugar 
Experiment Stations Limited and the Sugar Research Institute and 
others). 
The industry representative organisations will, presumably, continue to review 
their roles in light of the changing environment. 
Domestic benchmarking  
The regional plans developed by the RAGs indicate that Australia’s sugar industry has 
a significant number of participants that are not viable when the raw sugar pool price 
equivalent for planning purposes is assumed to be AUD250 per tonne and, in some 
cases, substantially higher. As discussed, AUD250 is a value at which, when all 
factors remain constant, efficient enterprises in Brazil can operate and expand. The 
value established for planning purposes was established to reflect a long-term decline 
in the real value for sugar and to permit the industry to identify a price point for 
break-even calculations. Whilst acknowledging differences exist between individual 
regions and mill areas, there appear to be entire milling and sugarcane producing 
sectors that are currently not viable at or near this price.  
Identifying the break-even cost of production is vital. Despite the use of independent 
consultants to assist in the development of the regional plans it was difficult to obtain 
full and meaningful data from all regions. The regional planning process highlighted 
that many in the industry have not fully segmented their costs to determine the true 
cost of production at their place in the value chain. If managed scale is to be pursued 
through purchase of assets, it is essential to identify the cost of production to establish 
a market value for assets. To enable benchmarking and measurement of productivity 
improvements domestically it is necessary to have relevant and accurate commercial 
intelligence.  
To assist restructuring within Australia’s sugar industry it is important that industry 
participants are capable of assessing the performance of their own businesses. The 
mill areas deliver production information to sugarcane growers throughout the 
crushing season. There is capacity for each business to use this data as one point of 
reference, among others, for benchmarking. Benchmarking may be enhanced by 
financial analysis of the production data.

- 35 - 
Recommendation 8 
As a matter of urgency, the industry in association with the Regional Advisory 
Groups undertakes comprehensive surveys of industry business practices and 
costs to allow for domestic industry benchmarking.  
International benchmarking  
In addition to understanding the domestic cost of production, it is important for the 
industry to understand the capacity and capability of competitors and factors affecting 
the world market for raw sugar. 
Australia’s raw sugar exported to the freely traded raw sugar market is a commodity, 
and the industry does not have the ability to influence the price. An understanding of 
the production capabilities and costs of major competitors is fundamental to 
anticipating future supply and demand in the freely traded raw sugar market. In 
addition, it is also important to have an understanding of the products competing with 
sugar as they affect demand for sugar. 
Preferences of consumers are one of the factors that influence demand for sugar. The 
increasing concern about the rising incidence of obesity and other medical conditions, 
such as diabetes, is impacting adversely on sugar consumption, particularly in 
developed countries. There is a perception that excess consumption of sugar may lead 
to diabetes. This may, however, be a misconception, as it is becoming increasingly 
evident that other high-calorie foods, such as fats and oils, may play a more 
significant role in causing this medical condition than the consumption of sugar does. 
The sugar-based health concerns were further heightened by the World Health 
Organisation in its 2003 health recommendations on the intake of free sugars, which 
suggested that sugar should comprise no more than 10 per cent of total calorie intake. 
The impact of this Advisory is likely to be most significant in developed countries, 
where it is estimated that sugar consumption is more likely to exceed this level, 
particularly as sugar is used as a food additive. This concern is leading to a growing 
promotion of alternative, low-calorie sweeteners, and may become a factor affecting 
the market for sugar. 
Furthermore, there is a point of view expressed that derivatives markets – such as the 
NY11 – may be overly influenced by speculative investors. A better understanding of 
supply and demand fundamentals and the long-term movement in prices determined 
by derivative markets may assist in making informed decisions throughout the 
industry.

- 36 - 
Recommendation 9 
The appropriate organisations undertake international monitoring and 
evaluation, with particular reference to Brazil and major competitors. This 
monitoring and evaluation should provide appropriate market intelligence and 
ongoing monitoring of the international market place so that Australia’s 
industry is better able to position itself for competitiveness. 
Diversification 
The regional plans confirm the industry will be raw sugar dependent in the medium 
term at least. The industry must initially address efficiency improvements that may 
accrue from exploitation of existing technology. The capacity to move to a lower cost 
of production through new products is limited in the near term, because proposed new 
products require further research to fully develop their sound business cases.  
A summary of potential diversification opportunities (step outs) for the sugar industry 
is provided at Appendix E. Biotechnologically modified (BM) sugarcane is included 
in this appendix: although it is not a diversification opportunity, it may provide a 
major productivity improvement. 
BM sugarcane, modified to deliver higher CCS, appears to be several years from 
commercial release. In addition to the costs of achieving commercial release and 
market acceptance there are costs incurred in segregating raw sugar generated from 
BM sugarcane within the value chain. Anecdotal reports indicate that the brewing 
industry, in particular, has expressed concern about the identification of BM sugar 
within the value chain. Costs of segregating food products manufactured from BM 
sugarcane will continue to be necessary while there are ongoing negative consumer 
perceptions about BM raw materials.  
The diversification opportunities (step outs) that may be applied by the industry fall 
into two broad categories. These categories are either ‘sugar-diverting’ or ‘non–sugar 
diverting’. Ethanol is the principal diversification that would fall into the 
sugar-diverting category if the industry were to adopt Brazil’s ethanol production 
system. Australia currently produces ethanol from molasses – a process which is non–
sugar diverting. Non–sugar diverting diversifications do not require sugar to be used 
as a raw material and do not reduce the total quantity of raw sugar manufactured. 
Cogeneration of electricity and production of furfural are examples of diversifications 
that are non–sugar diverting.  
The diversification product opportunities that are non–sugar diverting have less 
impact upon the quantity of sugar produced and may lead to a reduced cost of 
production within the industry. These opportunities have unique challenges to 
overcome before they may be applied by the industry. 
Infrastructure consequences for the port terminals within the industry would be likely 
if the quantity of raw sugar were to decrease significantly.  
The renewable energy sector has sought to develop an ‘enabling framework’ for the 
enhanced development of cogeneration of electricity based on using renewable fuels

- 37 - 
and ethanol as a complement to existing liquid fossil fuels. The Mandatory Renewable 
development of cogeneration of electricity based on renewable fuels. The IOG 
that it would continue to support the uptake of low-emission energy from renewable 
sources through the MRET, but would not extend or increase the target.21 
The point of view has been expressed that Brazil has demonstrated that introducing 
statutory arrangements for ethanol can lead to the establishment of a renewable 
energy industry. If cogeneration of electricity and ethanol are to provide Australia’s 
sugar industry with significant diversification options in a reasonable timeframe, the 
renewable energy sector argues that the enabling framework may need to incorporate 
statutory support mechanisms to encourage the commitment of capital to install 
further capacity.  
A number of stakeholders are evaluating the opportunity to establish a 
‘carbon credits’ trading regime as a part of the abatement programme for carbon 
dioxide emissions. The Kyoto Protocol recognises the role sugarcane cultivation can 
perform in sequestering carbon dioxide.22 There appears to be an opportunity to 
undertake a comprehensive mapping and due diligence study of the carbon dioxide 
sequestration capacity of the industry’s regions to determine the potential to supply 
carbon credits to a formal or informal market. 
Recommendation 10 
Given the limited diversification opportunities of industry significance, the 
industry, with the leadership advisory group and the members of the Regional 
Advisory Groups, undertakes a comprehensive scoping study to seek realistic 
and commercial diversification and value-adding opportunities (step-outs) that 
have broad applicability across the industry.  
22 Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, adopted 
11 December 1997.

- 38 -

- 39 - 
CHAPTER 2 – REGIONAL PLANS 
Purpose 
To outline the process and overview the regional plans. 
Regional planning  
Planning process 
As a part of the Sugar Industry Reform Programme (SIRP) 2004 the 
and implement regionally based plans.23 Members were tasked with identifying the 
key challenges facing the sugar industry and the community at the local level, and the 
most appropriate solutions, reflecting the unique circumstances of each region.  
To assist the RAGs to make assessments of viability, the Industry Oversight Group 
(IOG) provided guidance and assumptions on which each RAG could base its plans. 
The major parameters suggested to the RAGs for an assessment of regional industries 
included:  
• a price range of 6 US cents to 9 US cents per pound for freely traded raw sugar 
(using the New York Board of Trade Raw Sugar Futures Contract Number 11 or 
NY11) 
• an exchange rate of 70 US cents to 80 US cents per Australian Dollar (AUD) 
• a sugar pool price of around AUD250 per tonne of raw sugar, with a sensitivity of 
plus and minus 10 per cent 
• an annual inflation rate at 3 per cent. 
The process of preparing regional plans was often complex and demanding, but it is 
generally accepted by the RAGs that the process was valuable, because it: 
• engendered a better understanding of regional industry issues 
• provided for genuine ownership of the plans 
• provided a greater awareness of segmented costs, an analytical framework and a 
methodology which together have improved the industry’s understanding of the 
commercial environment for an internationally traded commodity 
• provided valuable data, audit and due diligence to support the plans.  
The task of finalising the regional plans was completed in September 2005.24 These 
were forwarded to the IOG for consideration and subsequent advice to the Minister.  
and Forestry, the Hon. Peter McGauran MP, stated in his media release of  
19 September 2005, ‘the plans were a solid basis for going forward in reforming the 
sugar industry’.  
It is significant that the members of the seven RAGs unanimously endorsed their 
individual plans. The IOG regards this as an undertaking by RAG members to drive 
23 The terms of reference for the Regional Advisory Groups are at Appendix C. 
24 Some information was provided on a commercial in confidence basis; this was treated according to 
the appropriate principles of board governance.

- 40 - 
reform and restructure in line with the regional plans. The RAGs report to the 
with implementation, and any subsequent amendments, of their regional plans. 
Common themes 
The regional plans prepared by the RAGs identified a number of problems and 
impediments, the solutions to which are imperative to reform and restructure. In the 
opinion of the IOG the common themes which can be drawn from the regional plans 
are: 
• they rely on significant production, productivity and yield increases and cost 
reductions 
• the viability of many growers dependent solely on cane is questionable at a pool 
price equivalent of AUD250 per tonne of raw sugar 
• transport and harvesting infrastructure, costs and utilisation need to be addressed 
• there are value chain issues and impediments to securing optimal mill throughput, 
for example, reliability of supply and limitations on season length, which also 
impact inventory holding costs and the timing of supply to markets 
• there have been constraints on capital expenditure and it is unclear where capital 
will be sourced to fund change 
• there are limited diversification options (step-outs) at the regional level 
• business/commercial skills need to be upgraded so participants can respond 
effectively to cost and market signals  
• understanding and cooperation in the industry needs development, and 
leadership/champions are needed to take the industry forward. 
These issues and others that the IOG has identified are canvassed in Chapter 1. The 
proposed solutions are discussed with respect to each of the common themes in the 
regional plans. 
The highlighted quotations in this chapter are from the regional plans and reflect the 
issues the RAGs have identified and need to confront in their regions. 
Productivity, production and yield increases and cost reductions 
 ‘Going forward, the RAG believe that over the next 3–5 years that across the growing sector 
we should target: 
• 
10% increase in cane yields 
• 
Sugar yield increases equivalent to a 0.5 unit increase in CCS 
• 
Reduction in growing costs of 15%’ 
‘Productivity Improvement Target: 3 year average yield increased to 100t/ha’ 
‘Improve Cane Productivity. Establish a single entity responsible for developing a Regional 
Business Plan to coordinate RD&E in the area including the adoption of Best Management 
Practices. Progress the adoption of new technologies such as Precision Farming/Site-Specific 
Technology and NIR Cane Analysis. Target: Increase productivity by 9 tc per hectare by 
2010.’ 
‘In large part this will come from an anticipated increase in the 2004 average yield across the 
region from 76 tonnes of cane per hectare to 94 tonnes of cane per hectare by 2009. This yield 
improvement will be delivered through both an increase in average yields resulting from the 
retirement of less productive cane lands, and better on-farm practices.’

- 41 - 
‘... whilst the harvested area relative to the assigned area for cane production has been 
increasing, cane and sugar production yields per hectare have been declining … A key 
initiative … is to achieve annual increases of three per cent in sugar yield per harvested 
hectare through implementation of best management practices.’ 
Many of the regional plans propose that the industry will be viable provided targets 
for productivity (increases in output with constant inputs), yield (tonnes of cane and 
sugar per hectare) and absolute production increases, along with unit cost reductions, 
are met. These goals are of extreme importance to Australia’s industry, given that its 
raw sugar exports are sold on the freely traded raw sugar market and the industry does 
not have the ability to influence the price – it is determined by the market. Therefore, 
Australia’s industry can only work on increasing its productivity and/or yield, and on 
reducing its cost of production, to ensure viability and sustainability. 
The goals targeted in the regional plans are ambitious. In a number of cases the 
expectation of yield and production increases in regions was optimistic given that, for 
example, sugar yield per tonne of cane has not improved greatly since the 1930s. 
Significant productivity increases without new technology are doubtful, and the 
expectation of year on year gains appears unattainable. To achieve aggregate cost 
reductions while simultaneously increasing production and productivity will be a 
challenge, given the need to increase inputs to achieve the proposed improvements. 
Any increase in productivity or yield should be linked to the cost of inputs needed to 
achieve the increases. In many cases, the real impact of annual inflation on costs was 
not taken into account. If inflation is taken into account the likely increases in the 
prices of inputs, such as fuel and fertiliser, may neutralise the effect of any potential 
revenue gains from increased production.  
Projected productivity and yield improvements to 2009 appear to have been 
determined using costs of inputs that remain fixed at prices from 2003–04 (or earlier). 
These productivity improvements cannot be factored in again to counter the effect of 
inflation. It is, in effect, double-counting the gain.  
For illustrative purposes, recognising that costs vary in the industry depending on 
several factors, Table 3 demonstrates the effect of annually compounded inflation 
over the next five years if AUD250 per tonne of raw sugar is used as a notional cost 
of production in the year 2005 and the ratio of inputs remains fixed. 
Table 3: Projected effect of compound inflation on AUD250 over five years 
Indicative inflation rate 
Calendar year 
3 per cent 
4 per cent 
5 per cent 
2005 
AUD250 
AUD250 
AUD250 
2006 
AUD258 
AUD260 
AUD263 
2007 
AUD265 
AUD270 
AUD276 
2008 
AUD273 
AUD281 
AUD289 
2009 
AUD281 
AUD293 
AUD304 
2010 
AUD290 
AUD304 
AUD319

- 42 - 
If some of the assumed improvements to achieve viability at AUD250 are not 
achieved, a higher starting point is necessary. Table 4 demonstrates the inflation effect 
at a notional cost of AUD275 per tonne of raw sugar. 
Table 4: Projected effect of compound inflation on AUD275 over five years 
Indicative inflation rate 
Calendar year 
3 per cent 
4 per cent 
5 per cent 
2005 
AUD275 
AUD275 
AUD275 
2006 
AUD283 
AUD286 
AUD289 
2007 
AUD292 
AUD297 
AUD303 
2008 
AUD301 
AUD309 
AUD318 
2009 
AUD310 
AUD322 
AUD334 
2010 
AUD319 
AUD335 
AUD351 
Regional plans identified insufficient revenue for viability of many participants in the 
industry, at an assumed sugar pool price equivalent of AUD250 per tonne. By 2010 
the notional starting point of a cost equivalent of AUD250 per tonne could potentially 
have escalated to AUD350, depending on the rate of inflation. In 2010 the viability of 
many participants will be challenged if other market and industry dynamics do not 
adjust to offset cost inflation.  
All participants need to adjust their business plans to take into account the 
accumulated effect of inflation on the base scenario. 
Viability and sustainability 
‘Growers in the region are, on average, marginally viable based on the cost data obtained for 
the region, at a sugar price of $250 per tonne. This assessment is based on sugar cane only and 
does not take into account the fact that approximately 48% of growers have off farm income 
and that 53% of farms grow other crops in addition to cane. The viability of certain growers in 
the region on a sugar cane only basis is questionable given that the average for the region is 
only marginally viable.’ 
‘The data modelling indicates that many growers in the less than 5,000 tonne farms are not 
viable as sugar cane producers at $250.’ 
The plans indicate that, on a fully costed basis, well-managed sugarcane enterprises 
may generate a wide range of margins, from negative to positive. Fundamentally, the 
absolute output of a farm imposes a limit on the net income that a grower can 
generate. Assuming the net margin from sugarcane ranges between AUD1.50 and 
AUD9.00 per tonne of cane, there is an inherent limit for a small-scale enterprise to 
generate an adequate level of income, especially if solely dependent on sugarcane for 
income. This is demonstrated in the matrix of potential margins in Table 5.

- 43 - 
Table 5: Matrix of potential margins from sugarcane production 
Maximum farm output of sugarcane 
Margin per 
tonne 
5 000 tonnes 
15 000 tonnes 
25 000 tonnes 
40 000 tonnes 
AUD1.50 
AUD7 500 
AUD22 500 
AUD37 500 
AUD60 000 
AUD3.00 
AUD15 000 
AUD45 000 
AUD75 000 
AUD120 000 
AUD5.00 
AUD25 000 
AUD75 000 
AUD125 000 
AUD200 000 
AUD7.00 
AUD35 000 
AUD105 000 
AUD175 000 
AUD280 000 
AUD9.00 
AUD45 000 
AUD135 000 
AUD225 000 
AUD360 000 
Note: Table 5 is based upon the simple assumption that there are neither economies nor diseconomies 
of scale.  
Many smaller growers in the industry rely on non-farm or non-sugarcane income to 
supplement their sugar income. As presented in Chapter 1, some areas appear to 
struggle to maintain sugarcane production as growers focus on activities that provide 
greater income. This has consequences for the total volume of sugarcane that may be 
produced within an area and the effect this has on the viability of sugar milling. 
Without sustainable sugarcane growers providing the critical mass of sugarcane the 
mill area’s future is threatened. 
 ‘Returns for most industry participants are average to poor and are likely to remain so.’ 
‘… has a viable farming and milling sector at a sugar price of $250 per tonne that can provide 
a reasonable return to their owners, although smaller businesses require off-farm earnings to 
supplement their income.’ 
 ‘At a sugar price of $250/tonne industry returns are insufficient to cover operating costs, 
depreciation and a return on growers’ labour. At a sugar price of $275/tonne the industry’s 
overall financial returns improve only to just more than a break-even basis.’ 
The regional plans indicate that the industry, as presently structured, does not have a 
long-term future based on raw sugar alone at the AUD250 price assumption. Some 
plans indicate that at prices approaching AUD300 there is insufficient income to 
ensure viability. Some regions will have greater adjustments to make than others to 
become part of a viable and sustainable sugar industry. The long-term revenue base in 
the plans does not provide adequate income for many participants in the industry.  
Value chain issues, including harvesting and transport 
 ‘The Regional Advisory Group and key stakeholders acknowledge that the sugar industry 
will have to become a leaner value-chain. A proportion of growers and harvesters has and will 
continue to exit the industry based on current margins.’ 
‘The number and capacities of the mills on the coast suggest that a case exists for mill 
rationalisation to occur to provide the benefits of economies of scale.’ 
‘Season length is key to improving returns for the milling sector in the long term ...’ 
‘One major area of change is likely to be greater vertical integration of the growing, 
contracting and milling sectors ...’

- 44 - 
‘The harvest sector will continue to restructure.’ 
‘Farm enterprises are seeking scale benefits, with growers implementing farming consortia to 
consolidate harvesting and farming enterprises.’ 
‘A reduction in the number of harvesting units and the associated increase in tonnage 
processed per unit can increase productivity and achieve economies of scale.’ 
Many costs in the value chain are averaged across participants. Individuals are not 
always aware of costs that are incurred at their point in the value chain. 
Overall, the dismantling of sector-specific legislation and regulation should encourage 
the identification and allocation of real costs to the relevant participants in the value 
chain. Identifying the real costs along the value chain should lead to improved 
management of these costs. 
The capacity to identify net margins from businesses to guide investment decisions 
has not been a standard business practice throughout the industry. Generally, in other 
business enterprises, reporting costs by segment is regarded as important to 
understand, measure and control the business. Understanding the factors influencing 
cost provides a business with the capacity to make decisions which optimise inputs. 
This identification of real costs also allows greater emphasis to be placed on those 
elements that are proportionately of greater relevance in the value chain.  
Allowing cost signals to flow through the value chain will provide a proper response 
to real costs and prices throughout the value chain. This means that participants would 
be exposed to real costs and make informed decisions about whether the related 
economic returns are sufficient to justify costs.  
A potential outcome could be that the sugarcane grower chooses to become a 
contracted supplier of the raw material (and not share directly in the value of raw 
sugar and its price and/or currency risk). This may offer greater certainty to future 
revenues and may provide the business enterprise with greater capacity to access 
capital. 
Harvesting and transport account for around one-third of the costs in the value chain. 
It appears that efficiency gains are possible in these components of the value chain. 
The costs of harvesting are a grower’s responsibility and the costs of transport rest 
with the mills. It is important for the RAGs and industry to identify cost elements 
within a mill and/or region to allow their allocation to increase the efficiency of the 
value chain. 
The regional plans highlighted harvesting as one of the most important concerns to be 
addressed in the value chain. In most regional plans harvesting was clearly identified 
as the segment of the value chain providing the greatest potential gains in 
productivity. Some areas within regions are already showing benefits through 
reducing the number of harvesting units and optimising existing harvesting groups. It 
appears that some benefits of effectively managed scale are being achieved in some 
areas.

- 45 - 
Streamlining the value chain is essential to the objective of ensuring optimal mill 
throughput through a reliable supply of cane. As mentioned, sustainable growers are 
needed. This will be enabled and their sustainability enhanced through the 
identification and reduction of real costs. A more reliable supply could be secured 
through long-term contracts for cane supply, based on a range of factors, including the 
supply of cane as a raw material, toll crushing, and incentivising performance. Mills 
may prefer to seek out larger scale committed growers for the mutual benefits of 
less-frequent negotiations and ensured supply of sugarcane. 
Capital 
 ‘…a lack of funding available to develop new opportunities reflecting competing investment 
opportunities and the longer implementation times for alternative agricultural opportunities’ 
‘The Regional Advisory Group sees that a key to the future success of the region is the retention 
and growth of cane production area and improvements in yield. However, there are a number of 
factors which may act against the achievement of these objectives: … lack of available finance.’ 
‘The industry has sought Commonwealth Government assistance through the Sugar Industry 
Reform Program Regional and Community Projects (RCP) program for financing of the capital 
requirements of its business improvement strategy which will be underpinned by a substantial 
cash and in-kind commitment from the industry itself.’ 
‘The financial feasibility of these mill diversification projects is dependant upon external 
funding, the provision of which is not yet finalised.’ 
Many regional plans have a strong reliance on future capital funding and industry  
re-investment appears to have been inadequate for many years. Apart from 
government funding through Regional and Community Projects, there was an absence 
of identified sources of capital.25 Reliance on future government funding through 
Regional and Community Projects is not a basis for sustainable planning.  
The milling sector has a high level of fixed assets that are currently used for five to six 
months per year. Apart from maintenance and some refurbishment there is little 
evidence of significant modernisation. Furthermore, no conventional milling plants 
have been built in Queensland in the past 80 years (Many new mills have been 
constructed in Brazil, for sugar, sugar and ethanol, or ethanol production). 
The period of low prices led many in the sector to substantially write down the value 
of assets, in some cases to land value. Accounting convention requires regular 
assessment of the ‘carrying value’ of assets – in short, the relativity of earnings to 
those assets. This is important in assessing true viability. Calculating earnings as a 
percentage of the value of assets this can lead to a misconception, if the assets are run 
down.  
As assessed in 2005, there had been little evidence of any worthwhile investment in 
farm machinery, in particular harvesting equipment, in the preceding five years.  
Changes in transport logistics in, and between, mill areas have left a number of 
transport assets stranded. In any case, the cane rail transport system, of approximately 
4 000 kilometres, is old.  
25 Regional and Community Projects are a component of the SIRP 2004.

- 46 - 
As scale is considered to be one of the keys to achieving efficiencies throughout the 
value chain, access to capital may be an issue for those wishing to aggregate by 
purchasing. 
Value adding and diversification also require capital. 
In the global society there is keen competition for capital, which is attracted to the 
best propositions. Old and mature businesses have less appeal than dynamic, growth 
businesses. Clearly there is a need for capital investment in the industry – the issue is 
how a self-reliant, mature industry can attract, raise and service the new capital. 
Diversification 
 ‘The situation analysis also identified a range of opportunities for the future in relation to 
optimisation of industry productivity, efficiency and cost, structural reform, value adding and 
diversification.’ 
‘The diversification vision is to secure profitable, complementary and alternative revenue 
streams for the sugar industry. The plan contemplates alternative uses for marginal cane land, 
complementary use of fallow cane land, and the use of sugar cane to produce a range of 
products in addition to raw sugar. This potentially could include furfural, stock feeds, ethanol 
and cogeneration of electricity.’ 
Diversification options fall into two categories: ‘step-outs’ for the sugar industry, and 
alternatives to raw sugar. 
Most plans refer to diversification or step-outs. The main step-outs identified in the 
plans include: 
• cogeneration of electricity 
• stockfeed 
• ethanol 
• furfural 
• biotechnologically modified sugarcane. 
A summary of diversification or step-outs for the industry is at Appendix E. 
A commonly suggested option – mixed or alternative cropping (as opposed to 
complementary cropping) – has the potential disadvantage of reducing reliable supply 
of cane to the mill, which could be critical to those mills where supply is already close 
to break-even throughput levels.  
Some of the suggested step-outs were also diversions away from the raw sugar 
stream, with attendant consequences for raw sugar exports that were not addressed by 
their proponents. However, there is no step-out of overall industry-wide significance. 
While many may prove positive contributions to raw sugar revenues they do not 
provide short-term solutions. Until these step-outs become widely accessible the 
industry has to continue its reliance on raw sugar production for its revenue base.

- 47 - 
Skills 
 ‘The Regional Advisory Group believes that further development of business and 
management skills is crucial to underpinning an economically viable and sustainable sugar 
industry ...’ 
A major issue raised in the regional plans is the need for improvement in business 
skills to enable reform and restructure to be addressed. It appears that there are 
industry participants who do not have the commercial and business management skills 
to respond to market and pricing signals for commercial activity. As the industry 
moves towards deregulation there is a need for further improvement of commercial 
and business skills. 
As generational change occurs, the industry will need to encourage and retain new 
participants. This may be difficult in some areas, where other industries may offer 
attractive alternatives to sugarcane growing, along with greater opportunities and 
benefits. To compete with these alternative sources of employment the sugar industry 
will have to demonstrate there is a long-term and profitable future for those wishing to 
enter the sugar industry. For the sugar industry to remain sustainable it needs the next 
generation of farmers to improve their business and commercial skills, especially in 
view of the now largely deregulated industry and new marketing arrangements in 
Queensland. The industry needs to take the initiative and encourage all its 
participants, particularly its younger participants, to broaden their skills so that they 
can take up the challenges in the next few years. 
Cooperation and leadership 
 ‘Priority aims to: 
• 
Increase cooperation between growers and millers in the region  
• 
Reach agreement (where practical) between millers to ensure the region moves 
forward.’  
‘… identification of capable leadership within the growing sector to successfully facilitate any 
transition process.’ 
Appointment or election does not, of itself, necessarily imply leadership skills. 
The often adversarial relationship between growers and millers, some of which stems 
from historic arrangements which have become institutionalised, appears to be a 
significant barrier to reform and restructuring within the industry. The 
sugarcane-producing sector and the sugarcane-milling sector are more interdependent 
than many other agricultural industries, and prolonging these tensions appears 
unproductive.  
The introduction of new marketing arrangements from 1 January 2006 may stimulate 
the development of different business relationships within the regions. Such a change 
will be necessary to ensure the sustainability of an industry where supplier and 
processor are mutually dependant. There is a need for leaders throughout the industry 
to overcome their historic attitudes and move to a relationship based on a commercial 
understanding of their interdependence. Identification and cultivation of key decision 
makers and ‘champions’ throughout the industry is also important. These decision 
makers/champions would work with the current industry appointees to encourage a

- 48 - 
new culture throughout the industry, based on commercial relationships. They could 
also bring new perspectives to assist in the reform and restructure of the industry. 
Overview 
The IOG acknowledges that reform and restructure of the industry has occurred to 
varying degrees and there is a general awareness of the imperative to deepen and 
widen the scope of regional reform and restructure. The target rate of progress in the 
current regional plans may not be sufficient to secure the outcomes needed for general 
stakeholder sustainability. Most regions emphasised optimistic production targets, 
yield and productivity increases, together with significant cost reductions, as 
immediate solutions. If any one of these goals is not realised there are likely to be 
detrimental consequences for many of the value chain participants in those regions.  
In addition, incremental restructure, although important, will not provide the 
necessary paradigm shift that allows the industry to effectively compete against an 
expanding competitor – the industry in Brazil. 
Both the Hildebrand Report and the Industry Guidance Group’s Industry Reform Plan 
recognised similar issues that industry needed to address to achieve real structural 
reform.  
Each RAG is responsible for the implementation of its regional plan.26 Outcomes for 
the local industry depend on its preparedness to continually update, refine and further 
develop and implement regional plans with determination and vigour. Such resolve 
may secure genuine reform and restructure, which, for a number of participants in the 
industry, is a survival issue. 
Points arising 
• Many of the issues identified in the regional plans by the RAGs are recurrent. 
• Some regions provided valuable data, audit and due diligence to support the plans.  
• There is a better understanding of regional industry issues. 
• There was not any ‘step-out’ of industry-wide significance. 
• The planning process has provided for greater awareness of the industry’s 
situation in regional communities.  
• Beneficial incremental restructure constitutes an advance but is not a substitute for 
a paradigm shift.  
• It is not clear what corrective actions would be taken if the goals targeted in the 
regional plans are not achieved – the ‘what if’ test.  
• The members of the seven RAGs unanimously endorsed their individual plans, 
and this indicates an undertaking by RAG members to drive reform and 
restructure in line with their regional plans.  
26 A copy of each regional plan is available at www.daff.gov.au/sirp or by making enquiries through the 
Sugar Executive Officer in each sugar region.

- 49 - 
CHAPTER 3 – WORLD SUGAR MARKET 
Purpose 
To outline the world sugar market and Australia’s position in that market.  
Raw sugar prices are volatile, cyclical and trend downwards 
Raw sugar is a traded commodity on the international market with limited product 
differentiation and an increasing concentration of suppliers. There is a well-developed 
and active futures market for raw sugar.  
The income for Australia’s sugar industry fluctuates significantly and is determined 
by volatile world prices and relative currency values. World price volatility is caused 
by changes in production, consumption and trade, and government policies, 
throughout the world. Protected markets, preferential trade arrangements, export 
subsidies and domestic pricing policies significantly influence world sugar trade and 
prices.  
There are two distinct markets for sugar – the ‘freely traded raw sugar market’ and the 
‘managed market’. The freely traded raw sugar market is characterised by sugar that 
is priced against the benchmark of the New York Board of Trade Raw Sugar Futures 
Contract Number 11 (NY11) and is exposed to market signals that bring demand and 
supply towards balance. The managed market is characterised by government 
interventions which result in excess production that is sold into the freely traded raw 
sugar market, often at less than ‘fair market value’. Therefore, the real costs of these 
interventions are transferred to the freely traded raw sugar market, increasing price 
volatility. 
The cycle of innovation and change and subsequent reduced costs of production 
generally drives the long-term downward trend in agricultural commodity prices. 
Sugar prices are consistent with this trend, as shown in Figure 1.  
Figure 1 – Sugar prices in real terms, 1800 to 2004 
Note: 
The index is the nominal sugar price deflated. The index is set so that the year 1800 is the base 
period (100). Sugar price data in the early part of the series reflect the prices of raw sugar in 
Figure 1: 
Blue – real prices 
Red – trend line

- 50 - 
London. More recent sugar price data, since the establishment of the New York exchange, use 
the prompt NY11 raw sugar futures prices.  
Source: LMC International  
Price volatility 
The NY11 is traded on the New York Board of Trade. The contract is a deliverable 
futures contract (albeit involving small quantities), with deliveries accepted from 
28 sugar-producing countries. The contract is recognised as a world benchmark for 
freely traded raw sugar prices.  
Figure 2 indicates the average daily settlement price for the NY11 contract, from its 
launch in 1970 to February 2006. The raw sugar price has experienced significant 
volatility and has ranged from 2.79 US cents per pound to 65.20 US cents per pound 
since 1970. 
Figure 2: NY11 daily price, 1 January 1970 to 10 February 2006 Nominal Prices 
0.00
10.00
20.00
30.00
40.00
50.00
60.00
70.00
05-Jan-70 
25-Apr-73 
17-Aug-76 
30-Nov-79 
10-Mar-83 
13-Jun-86 
19-Sep-89 
24-Dec-92 
04-Apr-96 
16-Jul-99 
1-Nov-02
03-Feb-06
US cents per pound
Source: New York Board of Trade 
All commodities experience cycles of price fluctuation which are linked to various 
price determinants, including investment cycles, and the durations of these cycles 
vary.  
The indicative world market prices for raw sugar traded on the NY11 from 1990 to 
1998 average over 10 US cents per pound, but for the period from 1999 to early 2006 
the average was only 7.77 US cents per pound. This trend in price reflects a number 
of factors – primarily the increasing and significant influence of Brazil on the world 
price of raw sugar. Brazil supplies half of the world’s raw sugar export market. This 
sugar is accounted for from one quarter of Brazil’s sugarcane. Significant quantities 
go to the ethanol market and the domestic sugar market. This domination of the 
market greatly influences the international price of sugar traded and is reflected in the 
NY11 and sugar pricing that is benchmarked on the NY11.

- 51 - 
Currency volatility 
Exchange rate movements of national currencies have a significant effect on the 
domestic price received by sugar producers, because futures contracts are in 
United States currency. Therefore, the price received by producers in each country 
needs to be converted to local currency. In Australia’s case this can mean a large 
disparity in the pool price for raw sugar. For illustrative purposes, if an exchange rate 
of 0.60 to 0.80 USD per AUD is anticipated over the short term, and a NY11 price of 
10 US cents per pound is nominated, an indicative value for raw sugar can range from 
approximately AUD367 per tonne to AUD276 per tonne, as shown in Table 6. 
Table 6: Raw sugar values in Australia (AUD) 
US cents per pound 
USD/
AUD 
6.00 
7.00 
8.00 
9.00 
10.00 
11.00 
12.00 
13.00 
0.60 
220 
257 
294 
331 
367 
404 
441 
478 
0.65 
204 
237 
271 
305 
339 
373 
407 
441 
0.70 
189 
220 
252 
283 
315 
346 
378 
409 
0.75 
176 
206 
235 
265 
294 
323 
353 
382 
0.80 
165 
193 
220 
248 
276 
303 
331 
358 
To manage exposure to sugar price volatility and exchange rate movements, a range 
of financial instruments such as futures, forward contracts and currency hedges are 
available.27 
As shown in Figure 3, Australia’s sugar industry is highly exposed to the world freely 
traded raw sugar price. This is a significantly greater exposure than its competitors 
face, because Australia exports around 80 per cent of its raw sugar production and 
applies export price parity to the domestic sugar market – this is generally not the case 
for most of its competitor countries. The impact of the exposure of a sugar-producing 
country to world prices depends on various factors, including the proportions of 
domestically traded and internationally traded sugar; the mix of products produced 
from cane and beet; and the level of domestic intervention and international trading 
subsidy programs.  
In some cases Australia’s competitors apply domestic support policies, and in other 
cases they may have a low export propensity compared to total sugar production. 
Australia’s sugar industry is more highly sensitive to incremental changes in world 
prices. This is unlikely to change in the foreseeable future, as Australia’s sugar 
industry is essentially an export market commodity supplier. Australia is generally a 
‘price taker’ in most agricultural commodities because it is of insufficient scale to 
significantly influence world prices. This is the case for Australia’s raw sugar exports. 
27 Sugar Industry Review Working Party (1996), Sugar winning globally, report to the Hon. 
T.J. Perrett MLA, Minister for Primary Industries, and the Hon. John Anderson MP, Minister for 
Primary Industries and Energy.

- 52 - 
Figure 3: Effect of domestic protection on sugar producers with an exportable  
 surplus 
Note: 
Brazil’s cane industry does not receive direct support and approximately half of the cane 
produced is directed towards ethanol production. 
Source: LMC International 2003 – raw data 
Global production and consumption  
World production of (raw and white) sugar in 2005–06 is estimated to exceed 
148 million tonnes and consumption is correspondingly predicted to reach almost 
152 million tonnes. This reflects a converging production and consumption position 
tending towards a supply deficit. Most recently, importers have been reducing their 
stocks of sugar in preference to paying higher prices for imports.28 Czarnikow Sugar’s 
analysis of the sugar market forecasts a draw-down in global stocks of 3.03 million 
tonnes of sugar in 2005–06.29 The world trade balance from 1996–97 to 2005–06 is 
depicted in Figure 4. 
Figure 4: World trade balance of sugar, 1996–97 to 2005–06 
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
1996/97
1997/98
1998/99
1999/00
2000/01
2001/02
2002/03
2003/04
2004/05
2005/06
Production/Consumption (mt)
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
Stocks (mt)
Stocks (RHS)
World Consumption (LHS)
World Production (LHS)
Source: LMC International 2006 
28 Queensland Sugar Limited 2005. 
29 Czarnikow Sugar Review (2005), 14 December 2005, report no. 1983 e 72.

- 53 - 
World annual production varies according to growing conditions, domestic policies in 
sugar producing countries, and demand from consumers. Government policies such as 
domestic price support regimes, sugar import restrictions and export subsidies reduce 
world consumption and stimulate world production. This has a flow-on effect to the 
freely traded raw sugar market in which Australia’s sugar industry participates.  
Consumption is driven primarily by population, price and income growth, as well as 
culture, relative prices of sugar and substitute sweeteners, availability of sugar, 
preferences of consumers and policies of governments.  
Sugarcane can be an attractive commodity for developing and least developed 
countries (LDC) to cultivate and process for domestic consumption and export. Sugar 
is a staple food product in many developing countries and LDCs. Many developing 
and LDC countries have concerns about food security, and their governments 
encourage sugar production. Sugarcane is also relatively easy to grow and can be 
produced efficiently in tropical climates by a wide range of technologies from low to 
high-capital intensive production. Further, sugar can be an important source of foreign 
exchange earnings for developing and LDC countries. Often these countries are 
granted access to protected markets at preferential prices – for example, through the 
African, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) and Everything But Arms (EBA) policies of the 
European Union.  
Developing countries and LDCs are becoming increasingly influential in world sugar 
consumption, production and trade. About two-thirds of the world sugar consumption 
is in these countries. In addition, almost all sugar consumption growth is due to 
demand generated by these countries as populations and personal disposable incomes 
rise.  
Sugar has a number of competitors, such as calorific sweeteners produced from corn 
starch, for example high-fructose corn syrup (HFCS). HFCS is used extensively in the 
United States and Japan as a substitute for sugar in a number of products, such as soft 
drinks. In the United States, HFCS accounts for almost 50 per cent of calorific 
sweetener consumption.  
In addition, there is increasing concern about the rising incidence of obesity and other 
medical conditions, such as diabetes, which is impacting adversely on sugar 
consumption, particularly in developed countries. There is a perception that excess 
consumption of sugar may lead to diabetes. This may, however, be a misconception, 
as it is becoming increasingly evident that other high-calorie foods, such as fats and 
oils, may play a more significant role in causing this condition than the consumption 
of sugar does. 
Sugar-based health concerns were further heightened by the World Health 
Organisation in its 2003 health recommendations on the intake of free sugars, which 
suggested that sugar should comprise no more than 10 per cent of total calorie 
intake.30 The impact of this Advisory is likely to be most significant in developed 
countries, where it is estimated that sugar consumption is most likely to exceed this 
level. This concern is leading to a growing demand for alternative, low-calorie 
30 LMC International (2004), Sweetener analysis, March.

- 54 - 
substitutes, such as aspartame, as well as a decreased absolute demand for sweeteners, 
and is likely to slow the rate of growth in global sugar consumption.  
Low-calorie substitutes include saccharine, aspartame, cyclamates and sucralose. To 
date the use of artificial sweeteners has been limited by their poor properties in 
baking, since most lack the bulk of sugar and do not respond well to high 
temperatures.  
Sucralose overcomes most of these limitations and is increasing its market share. In 
addition, a new production facility for sucralose is being developed in Singapore. 
Other new ‘natural’ sweeteners, such as stevia and thaumatin, are also being revisited 
in the light of the success of sucralose.  
Over the medium term, sugar consumption is expected to rise broadly in line with 
increases in population and income levels. However, growth in developed countries 
may be less pronounced, due to the health concerns outlined above as well as 
declining growth in demand at higher levels of personal disposable income. At higher 
income levels, rising per capita incomes no longer necessarily have the same positive 
effect on the growth of sugar consumption.  
The sugar industry worldwide is diversifying and evaluating its options. Alternate 
products that can be commercially manufactured from raw sugar and sugarcane and 
associated by-products may, if economic, mitigate the likely decline in human sugar 
consumption.  
Trade in sugar  
As mentioned, global trade in sugar (raw and white) is comprised of two distinct 
markets – the ‘freely traded raw sugar market’ and the ‘managed market’. The 
managed market consists of traded sugar that is insulated from market forces by the 
intervention of domestic support regimes, export subsidies or preferential access 
arrangements to countries with import protection. Generally, producers that 
participate in this market are isolated from international prices, and the intervention 
distorts the managed market and results in excess production. This oversupply is 
disposed of at less than ‘fair market value’ in the freely traded raw sugar market, 
exacerbating raw sugar price volatility. This in effect means that, in part, the real cost 
of the trade restraints in the managed market are passed on to producers supplying the 
freely traded raw sugar market. 
Conversely, the market for freely traded raw sugar consists of sugar that is traded 
against the benchmark of the NY11. It is therefore subject to market signals and 
economic forces that would, other factors being equal, tend to bring production and 
consumption towards equilibrium. This may reduce price volatility and allow 
planning by suppliers. 
The world market for freely traded raw sugar functions largely as a residual market. 
Most producers of sugar prefer to supply their domestic markets and preferential trade 
markets where they can receive preferential prices and/or guaranteed market share. 
Around 70 per cent of the world’s sugar is consumed in the country of production. 
Sugar that cannot be placed in these markets is sold into the freely traded raw sugar 
international market. The government policies of participants in the managed market

- 55 - 
are transmitted to the freely traded raw sugar market through excess demand (buying 
from the freely traded raw sugar market and inflating the world price) or excess 
supply (selling into the freely traded raw sugar market and depressing the world 
price). This increases the amplitude of cyclical price volatility in this global market.31 
This increased price volatility impacts on the ability of participants who mainly 
operate in the freely traded raw sugar market to make informed investment decisions.  
Brazil, Australia, the European Union, Thailand, Guatemala and South Africa 
dominate total sugar export trade, which was almost 47 million tonnes of sugar in 
2004–05. Around 26 million tonnes was raw sugar and just over 21 million tonnes 
was white sugar. The composition of world exports is depicted in Figure 5.  
Figure 5: Major sugar (raw and white) exporters’ percentages of world exports, 
2004–05 
Brazil 
38%
EU
13%
Australia
10%
Thailand
7%
Guatemala
3%
Other
27%
South Africa 
2%
Source: LMC International 2006 
The major net sugar importers include Russia, the Middle East, Indonesia, 
South Korea, Japan, the United States, Malaysia and Canada, with India’s status 
varying depending on domestic production conditions.32 Many of these countries have 
preferential arrangements for the importation of sugar, and many countries do not 
have free access to these markets.  
The major export markets for Australia’s raw sugar are principally in the Pacific Rim: 
South Korea, Japan, Malaysia, Indonesia, China, Canada and the United States.33 
Australia is denied open access to the European Union. The composition of world 
imports is displayed in Figure 6. 
31 Sugar Industry Review Working Party 1996. 
32 Middle East includes the Persian Gulf, Saudi Arabia, Syria, Iraq, Iran and Yemen. 
33 Access to the United States is through an import quota.

- 56 - 
Figure 6: Major sugar (raw and white) importers’ percentages of world imports, 
2004–05 
Other
44%
Middle East 
11%
USA
4%
India
5%
EU
5%
Indonesia
6%
Russia
10%
South Korea
3%
Malaysia
3%
Japan
3%
Canada 
3%
China
3%
Source: LMC International 2006 
Increasing concentration 
Major countries trading sugar on the global market are concentrating in number, as 
shown in Figure 7. In 1990, the five major exporters supplied 60 per cent of traded 
sugar (raw and white), but they now supply 70 per cent of the same global trade. 
Since 1990 Brazil has expanded production significantly: in 1990 it exported 
1.6 million tonnes of raw sugar, and in 2004–05 it was expected to export around 
17 million tonnes, a more than tenfold increase. 
Figure 7: World net sugar exports 
Source: FO Licht 2005

- 57 - 
As Brazil’s share of world supply increases, world prices become increasingly 
sensitive to incremental fluctuations in Brazil’s output. Smaller export suppliers are 
becoming less relevant to international trade and price determination – they are price 
takers. To be internationally viable, suppliers need to be competitive against Brazil.  
Raw sugar 
Australia’s major competitors in the raw sugar market are Brazil, Thailand, 
South Africa and Guatemala. As shown in Table 7, these countries together supply 
almost 78 per cent of total raw sugar exports. 
Table 7: Raw sugar exports, 2002–03 to 2005–06 
2002–03 
2003–04 
2004–05 
2005–06(A) 
Volume 
% world 
raw sugar 
exports 
Volume 
% world 
raw sugar 
exports 
Volume 
% world 
raw sugar 
exports 
Volume 
% world 
raw sugar 
exports 
Brazil (B) 
8 967 
37.6 
10 774 
44.0 
12 442 
46.9 
12 160 
46.5 
Australia 
3 984 
16.7 
3 773 
15.4 
4 319 
16.3 
4 122 
15.8 
Thailand 
2 894 
12.1 
1 958 
8.0 
1 678 
6.3 
1 253 
4.8 
South Africa  
1 156 
4.9 
818 
3.3 
820 
3.1 
920 
3.5 
Guatemala 
1 051 
4.4 
891 
3.6 
1 323 
5.0 
1 323 
5.1 
Total above 
18 052 
75.8 
18 214 
74.3 
20 582 
77.5 
19 778 
75.6 
World 
23 826 
24 501 
26 552 
26 157 
Notes: 
(A) Figures for 2005–06 are estimates. 
(B) Based on Brazil’s raw sugar exports as defined by LMC International. LMC International reports 
total sugar exports (raw and white) by Brazil as 13 083 tonnes, 14 793 tonnes, 17 639 tonnes and 
16 969 tonnes in respective years. 
Source: LMC International 2006 
Australia’s competitiveness in the raw sugar market 
Brazil’s effective costs of sugar production were reported to be around 5 US cents to 
6 US cents per pound early in the twenty-first century, when its sugar industry 
expanded and its currency dramatically depreciated against the United States Dollar 
(USD). More recent information suggests that Brazil’s costs may have increased to a 
level of 8 US cents to 9 US cents per pound in 2005 – although this cost estimate is an 
average across Brazil’s sugar industry, which is mainly concentrated in the centre-
south region. There are significant differentials in costs across the sugar producing 
regions of Brazil. There is significant scope for improved efficiencies in Brazil’s 
industry, through uptake of technology and mechanisation, which would act to 
mitigate cost inflation in the sugar industry. Brazil’s ethanol and sugar industries are 
examined in greater detail in Chapter 5. 
Another issue influencing Australia’s competitiveness is the substantial differences 
between countries in the costs of factors of production including capital (interest rates 
and capital replacement costs), taxation, labour, land and energy. There are also 
substantial differences between producing countries when it comes to the compliance 
costs of environmental, labour and social standards set by national governments. 
These compliance costs can sometimes be a significant component of an industry’s 
total cost structure. Typically producers in developing countries and LDCs are not 
exposed to equivalent business overhead costs to those incurred in developed

- 58 - 
countries. Due to differentials in cost structures many can profitably produce and 
market sugar at lower world prices.34 
Australia’s comprehensive business regulatory environment imposes overhead costs 
on industry participants, which are likely to remain for the foreseeable future.  
As shown in Figure 8, Australia’s currency is one of the strongest amongst its sugar 
industry competitors. This exchange rate differential reinforces the need to implement 
continual cost efficiency measures. This is because the higher domestic returns to 
competitors, due to exchange rate advantages, allow them to participate in the raw 
sugar market at lower global commodity prices. 
Figure 8: Comparison of relative currency exchange rates 
Index of Exchange Rates with US Dollar
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
1/01/2002
1/04/2002
1/07/2002
1/10/2002
1/01/2003
1/04/2003
1/07/2003
1/10/2003
1/01/2004
1/04/2004
1/07/2004
1/10/2004
1/01/2005
1/04/2005
1/07/2005
1/10/2005
1/01/2006
Index
South Africa
Australia
Thailand
Guatemala
Brazil
Source: www.oanda.com/converter/fxhistory 
Australia’s raw sugar customers 
There is unlikely to be a major change in Australia’s raw sugar customers. Despite 
markets is unlikely in the foreseeable future, because of the gradual pace of trade 
liberalisation.  
Australia exports around 4 million tonnes of raw sugar per year. With the expansion 
of Brazil’s sugar industry, Australia is now the world’s second largest net exporter of 
raw sugar, supplying approximately 16 per cent of global annual trade in raw sugar. 
Australia’s raw sugar customers are refiners of sugar principally in the Pacific Rim: 
South Korea, Japan, Malaysia, Indonesia, China, Canada and the United States. 
Potential customers include Russia, Ukraine, countries in north and west Africa, and 
34 Gudoshnikov, S., Jolly, L. and Spence, D. (2004), The world sugar market, International Sugar 
Organisation , p. 147.

- 59 - 
India, depending on their own domestic production. Australia has access to the 
United States market through a quota system. Australia’s small, but high-value 
(because of the high domestic prices for sugar in the United States), quota is 87 402 
metric tonnes. There have been some short-term increases in the quota due to 
short-term difficulties with the United States’s domestic sugar supply. The quota is 
small quantities involved, the Western Australian and New South Wales industries 
typically sell their quota allocation to Queensland Sugar Limited (QSL).  
Australia has developed strong relationships with its customers in the Asian region. 
Australia’s sugar industry has faced significant difficulties over recent years, and the 
regular requests by Australia’s sugar industry for government financial assistance 
could be perceived negatively by customers and impact on their perceptions of 
Australia as a reliable long-term supplier of raw sugar.  
Australia, due to its geographical proximity, is well placed to meet the increasing raw 
sugar supply deficit in Asia, which escalated from around 5 million tonnes to 
19 million tonnes between 1995–96 and 2004–05. Figure 9 shows the regional supply 
and demand balances for 2004–05. 
Figure 9: Regional supply and demand balances for sugar (raw and white), raw 
value,’000 tonnes, 2004–05 crop year  
-30000
-20000
-10000
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
70000
Europe
Central and
North
America
South
America
Asia
Africa
Oceania
'000 tonnes
Production
Consumption
Surplus/Deficit
Imports
Exports
Source: LMC International 2005b 
Australia’s raw sugar industry claims several advantages over its competitors and, 
conversely, acknowledges some constraints. Australia appears to have a preferred 
product, because of quality standards, consistency, reliability and timeliness of 
delivery. QSL has developed strong relationships with major refiners in import 
markets in Asia. Australia has freight advantages over Brazil in these markets, and a 
product preference ahead of Thailand.

- 60 - 
Factors influencing trade 
Some major sugar-producing countries – China, the European Union, India and the 
United States – intervene in the market, through government policies which regulate 
their sugar industries. In particular, they apply trade restrictions (non-tariff barriers) 
and domestic price support mechanisms which distort raw sugar prices. These major 
countries use the international freely traded raw sugar market to manage domestic 
sugar surpluses and shortfalls. In doing so, they pass their production and demand 
exposures on to the freely traded raw sugar market, adding to the cyclical price 
volatility in this market.  
Some of Australia’s major competitors – Thailand, South Africa and Guatemala – 
intervene in their domestic sugar markets mainly through domestic regulatory 
policies.  
Many other countries intervene in domestic markets and only their small market share 
prevents government actions from significantly distorting global markets.35 
Cumulatively, their surplus production may act to suppress prices in the freely traded 
raw sugar market, because they may trade excess production at less than fair value. 
The domestic sugar price is higher than the world price in most countries; in some 
cases it significantly exceeds the world price. These pricing policies encourage sugar 
production even when a country does not have a competitive advantage, resulting in 
market distortion because the surplus is sold onto the freely traded sugar market. The 
sugar market is generally acknowledged to be one of the most distorted global 
commodity markets, due to the high degree of government regulatory intervention. 
Sugar is regarded as a highly ‘sensitive’ agricultural product in world trade 
negotiations, and is arguably the most sensitive agricultural product in international 
trade because of its socioeconomic repercussions in many national economies.36 
Of great concern to Australia is that approximately 80 per cent of world sugar (white 
and raw) production and 60 per cent of world sugar (white and raw) trade is at 
subsidised or protected prices.37  
Reform of sugar intervention policies 
Trade and domestic policy reform is a desirable goal for all agricultural commodities, 
including sugar. Benefits of trade liberalisation include increased market access, 
lower domestic support mechanisms and the dismantling of export subsidies in 
sugar-producing countries. The Organisation for Economic Cooperation and 
Development (OECD) suggests that improved market access will have a greater 
impact on trade flows than any other element in the current World Trade Organisation 
(WTO) negotiations. This is because of the continuing incidence of significant market 
35  Larson, D.F. and Borrell, B. (2001), Sugar policy and reform, World Bank policy, research and 
external affairs policy research working paper, May, WPS 2602. 
36 The definition of a ‘sensitive product’ is currently being negotiated in the World Trade Organisation. 
A ‘sensitive’ product can be nominated on the basis of economic, political or social reasons to sanction 
slower phased reductions in trade barriers (tariffs) than those that apply to other goods and services. 
Countries will be able to nominate a certain percentage of their tariff item lines as sensitive products.  
37 Mitchell, D. (2005), Sugar policies and opportunity for change, global agricultural trade and 
developing countries policy research working paper, February WPS 3222.

- 61 - 
access barriers in both developing and developed countries, and the fact that these 
policies are distorting.38 
Sugar has traditionally been viewed and treated as a sensitive product in world trade. 
Therefore, reform of domestic support and international trade policies relating to 
sugar has been severely limited in other parts of the world. 
Government interventions through domestic and trade policies relating to sugar are 
often long standing and based on historic trade arrangements (many based on former 
colonial relationships), food security, and conflicting interests between growers and 
sugar mills. As a result of these interventions there has been the emergence of large 
domestic sugar price differentials between countries. This translates into difficulties in 
harmonising sugar policy positions in bilateral, regional and multilateral trade forums.  
Government policies may bias investment decisions in milling and improvements to 
land, and become embedded in capital costs and other fixed factors of production. 
Their effects are compounded because they must be maintained to protect these 
investments. For example, investments are sometimes based on continuing 
preferential access to protected markets, such as ACP exports to the European Union. 
For the majority of the ACP countries, export earnings from these sales are important 
to their national economies, contributing significantly to national incomes, foreign 
currency reserves and government revenues. Policy changes in destination markets 
can have significant consequences for the economies of these countries. 
The effects of distorting, protectionist policies often lead to the formation of 
well-defined groups that are dependent on continued interventions. Producer groups 
often base arguments for government protection of domestic markets on the 
regulatory regimes of third countries. The domestic sugar industry policies in many 
countries are shaped by the intervention policies of a few large countries involved in 
the global sugar market. 
Until reforms are initiated by the nations with the most comprehensive support 
regimes for their sugar industries, it will be difficult for wider reform to be 
contemplated: 
Long-standing government interventions frequently displace both the markets and the 
institutions required to produce efficient outcomes. In addition, based on 
long-standing policies, households and firms made decisions that are costly to 
reverse. The result is a legacy of path-dependent policies, where approaches and 
instruments are greatly influenced by past agreements and previous interventions. The 
accumulated effects of these interventions are embodied in the livelihoods, political 
institutions, capital stocks and factor markets – elements that not only dictate the 
starting point for reform but also determine which paths are feasible.39  
World Trade Organisation 
The current Doha Round of WTO negotiations seeks further dismantling of trade 
distorting national behaviours in addition to that achieved during the Uruguay Round. 
38 Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) (2005a), Tackling trade in 
agriculture, OECD policy brief, November.  
39 Larson, D.F. and Borrell, B. 2001.

- 62 - 
Reaching a consensus on agricultural trade reform has been fraught with difficulty as 
sugar is considered a highly sensitive product in world trade terms. The benefit of any 
agricultural trade liberalisation is unlikely to flow through to the global sugar market 
in the short term or even the medium term.  
goods spectrum and actively supports the WTO negotiations. The 
Sugar Trade Reform and Liberalisation (Global Sugar Alliance) and Australia’s sugar 
industry membership of this organisation. The Global Sugar Alliance is made up of 
sugar producers from exporting and importing countries who are working to build 
international support for a more equitable global trade in sugar. The group was 
founded in 1999 with the aim of achieving progressive reform of domestic support 
programs and international trade policies detrimentally affecting sugar industries 
worldwide. It is involved in the current WTO negotiations. 
European Union sugar regime WTO challenge 
Brazil, strongly supported by Australia and subsequently joined by Thailand, 
successfully challenged the European Union’s sugar export subsidies through the 
WTO dispute settlement mechanism. The European Union dominates world trade in 
white sugar, which it produces predominantly from sugar beet. In 2004–05 the 
European Union exported just over 6 million tonnes of white sugar and imported just 
over 1.8 million tonnes of raw sugar and 0.7 million tonnes of white sugar. 
Traditionally, the European Union has operated a highly regulated sugar industry 
comprising a complex system of quotas, domestic support price regimes, export 
subsidies and preferential access by developing countries (through the Sugar Protocol 
with the ACP group of nations and the EBA initiative). 
The WTO determined that certain export subsidies applying to sugar were in breach 
of the European Union’s WTO commitments, and a sharp reduction (4 million to 
5 million tonnes of white sugar) in exports is required.  
The WTO dispute settlement panel found that C quota sugar exports by the 
European Union benefit from export subsidies by being cross-subsidised with 
revenues from production under A and B quotas.40 In addition, the European Union 
exceeded its export subsidy commitments, through its subsidised exporting of 
1.6 million tonnes of sugar, which is equivalent to imports from ACP countries and 
India.41  
After May 2006 only the 1.27 million tonnes of white sugar that is bound under its 
WTO export subsidy commitment will be eligible for export, and payments will be 
capped at EUR499.1 million. The European Union is required to comply with the 
WTO decision by 22 May 2006. 
40 C quota sugar is over-quota production that is exported outside the European Union. A and B quotas 
relate to domestic and export production respectively. 
41 European Commission (2005), The European sugar sector: its importance and its future, European 
Commission, June.

- 63 - 
The European Union will institute phased reform proposals. The IOG understands 
(based on a press release issued by the European Commission on 24 November 2005) 
that the major elements of the programme are: 
• The intervention price for white sugar (currently set at EUR631.9 per tonne of 
sugar) will be phased out and replaced by a reference price system which is 
36 per cent lower. Prices will decline to this new level over four years: EUR505.5 
in 2006–07, EUR458.1 in 2007–08, EUR410.7 in 2008–09, and EUR404.4 in 
2009–10 and beyond. 
• Quotas A and B will be merged and the quota system will remain in place until 
2014–15, without review. 
• Payments on a per tonne basis over four years of EUR730 in 2006–07 and  
2007–08, EUR625 in 2008–09 and EUR520 in 2009–10 will be made to 
encourage factory closure and renunciation of quota as well as to cope with the 
social and environmental impact of the restructuring process.  
• In those countries giving up at least 50 per cent of their quotas, there may be an 
additional coupled payment of 30 per cent of the income loss for a maximum of 
five years, plus possible limited national aid. 
• Compensation will be made to sugar beet farmers at an average of 64.2 per cent of 
the 36 per cent price cut through a decoupled payment. This payment will be 
included in the Single Farm Payment and linked to environmental and land 
management standards.  
• A private storage system will be introduced as a safety net in case the market price 
falls below the reference price.  
• Developing countries will continue to enjoy preferential access to the 
European Union market at attractive prices. Those ACP countries which need it 
will be eligible for an assistance plan worth EUR40 million for 2006, which will 
pave the way for further assistance. 
It is unlikely that additional access for sugar will be granted by the European Union, 
but additional raw sugar markets may emerge, as white sugar exports from the 
European Union are predicted to contract. Declining European Union sugar exports 
mean there will be minimal beet sugar traded in the international market. This may 
influence the dynamics of the global sugar market. Demand for raw cane sugar could 
increase, and many refiners are likely to evaluate opportunities to increase their 
refining capacities to supply the market currently occupied by European Union beet 
sugar. In the short term, the European Union may seek to dispose of its reserves of 
sugar onto the freely traded market before the 22 May 2006 deadline. 
These decisions will impact on the composition and direction of global sugar trade 
flows, and there may be opportunities for low-cost cane sugar producers to increase 
supply to meet changing global sugar market dynamics. 
Free trade agreements and negotiations 
In addition to the Doha Round of trade negotiations in the WTO, which remains 
Australia’s top trade priority, Australia is involved in an extensive programme of free 
trade agreement (FTA) negotiations. This is part of the mutually reinforcing 

- 64 - 
Australia has announced the commencement of negotiations towards FTAs with three 
bilateral partners – China, Malaysia and the United Arab Emirates – and towards a 
regional FTA between Australia, New Zealand and the Association of South East 
Asian Nations (ASEAN). These negotiations follow on from the FTAs finalised with 
the United States and Thailand and existing FTAs with New Zealand and Singapore. 
In addition, Australia and Japan are undertaking a joint study on the feasibility of an 
FTA. This study is scheduled to be completed by April 2007. 
comprehensive agreements that maximise the benefits of the arrangements to all 
the exclusion of any sectors or industries, including sugar, from the negotiations or 
from any final outcome.  
Multilateral trade reform and liberalisation is a gradual process. There have been 
some gains made in the WTO through tariff reductions, liberalised tariff quotas and 
restrictions on the use of subsidies in previous rounds and, more recently, by 
successfully challenging the European Union sugar regime. Improved market access, 
however, is the key goal for trade reform and is harder to secure. The 
substantial improvement in market access being sought by industry. 
Australia’s sugar industry is working with likeminded countries in the Global Sugar 
forums, to progress trade reform.  
Points arising 
• Raw sugar is a simply transformed, internationally traded commodity which many 
countries can produce easily. 
• There are two major markets for traded sugar – the freely traded raw sugar market 
and the managed market.  
• World prices for freely traded raw sugar are cyclically volatile and are 
characterised by a long-term downward trend.  
• Australia’s sugar industry is an export commodity supplier and price taker on the 
world market and will remain so in the foreseeable future.  
• There is a concentration of suppliers to the global market and, to be internationally 
viable, suppliers need to be competitive with Brazil.  
• Trade is distorted by domestic and international policies and the trade 
liberalisation process is gradual. 
• Currency exchange rates have an impact on producer returns. 
• There are perceived health issues related to excessive sugar consumption, mainly 
in developed countries. 
• Developing countries and LDCs are generating increases in the consumption of 
sugar. 
• Alternative sweeteners to sugar appear to be gaining consumer acceptance. 
• The WTO Doha Round may encourage increased sugar production in developing 
countries and LDCs.

- 65 - 
• Changes to the European Union sugar regime may influence the dynamics of the 
global sweeteners market. 
• Queensland’s new marketing arrangements should maintain customer confidence 
in export sugar supply and service capabilities.

- 66 -

- 67 - 
CHAPTER 4 – BRAZIL 
Purpose 
To outline the scale of Brazil’s sugar industry, summarise government policies that 
encouraged sugarcane production, review the potential for industry expansion and 
evaluate the intrinsic importance of sugar production to Brazil’s economy. 
Brazil’s sugar industry  
Figure 10: Regions of Brazil 
The IOG considers Brazil fundamental to any discussion about the world’s market for 
sugar. Examination of Brazil’s contemporary sugar industry needs to take into 
account the nation’s ethanol production. The focus on ethanol is a prerequisite 
because Brazil’s agricultural policy from 1975 to the mid-1990s actively encouraged 
ethanol production from sugarcane, through the now-abandoned Proalcool 
programme. The planned development of Brazil’s ethanol industry through Proalcool 
has enhanced Brazil’s capacity to dominate the world market for sugar. Potential 
investors in the sugar industry need to be aware of Brazil’s potential to divert cane 
from ethanol production to crystal sugar milling, and the impact on the commodity’s 
global pricing.  
As the world’s dominant sugarcane producer, Brazil casts a long shadow across the 
international sugar market. Brazil is the world leader in the production of sugar and 
ethanol. With a population of 180 million, and one of the highest consuming nations 
of sugar per capita, it is also the third-largest sugar consumer in the world.  
Tropic of Capricorn 
Equator 
North 
North-east 
Centre-west 
South-east 
South

- 68 - 
Brazil’s agriculture development policies  
The development of Brazil’s agricultural industries has been promoted by government 
policies since the 1960s. Since 1996 these have included preferential access to capital 
and exemption from export taxes. These policies have encouraged the formation of 
‘mega-scale’ vertically integrated sugar-based agribusinesses.  
On 31 October 2005, the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development 
(OECD) published a comprehensive review of Brazil’s agriculture policies.42 A precis 
of the policy planning that has encouraged the evolution of Brazil’s sugar industry is 
highlighted below.  
Brazil’s policy makers traditionally manage domestic agricultural markets through 
regulation. Price interventions were introduced in the 1940s, amid wartime food 
security concerns. From the 1950s, Brazil adopted an import substitution, 
industrialisation economic strategy, which involved wide-ranging controls over 
supply and prices in the agrifood sector. Prices were both supported for producers and 
subsidised to consumers.  
These policies continued until the late 1980s, when the government began to reform 
what had evolved into an institutionally rigid agrifood price system. Special 
marketing regimes existed for sugar, regulated by the Institute of Sugar and Ethanol 
Marketing Board, which set overall production and marketing quotas and controlled 
prices and trade. The government retained the regulated market regime until the 
mid-1990s, when the domestic market was liberalised. 
Brazil’s economic reform  
Brazil’s government initiated macroeconomic reforms in the early 1990s in a bid to 
stem hyperinflation. Annual inflation peaked at about 2 500 per cent in 1993. The 
Cardoso Administration introduced the Real Plan in late 1993 and by July 1994 
inflation and nominal interest rates had declined. With tight monetary and fiscal 
policy, the indexation system dismantled, and a currency linked to the United States 
Dollar (USD) driving down domestic import prices, inflation fell to 22 per cent in 
1995. 
In January 1999, economic difficulties and capital outflows escalated when the 
governor of the state of Minas Gerias suspended that state’s debt payments to the 
federal government. After a managed 8 per cent devaluation of the Brazilian Real 
(BRL) failed, the central bank floated the currency. By February 1999, the BRL had 
depreciated 70 per cent against the USD. From February 1999 to July 2001 the BRL 
further depreciated by the same relative amount. 
Contrary to initial fears, the currency float in January 1999 did not generate strong 
inflationary pressures. Since mid-1994 the macro-economy has stabilised and the 
micro-economy has generally become more efficient.43 The devaluation of the BRL 
42 Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) (2005b), OECD Review of 
Agricultural Policies – Brazil. 
43 Austrade (2001), Investing in Latin American growth – unlocking opportunities in Brazil, Mexico, 
Analytical Unit.

- 69 - 
relative to the Australian Dollar (AUD) and the USD is illustrated in Figure 11. It 
demonstrates the emerging relationship between the exchange rates of the AUD and 
BRL since early 2004. There may be an informal relationship evolving between 
Australia’s and Brazil’s currencies when compared to the United States currency. Any 
relative change in the exchange rate of the United States currency appears to be 
transmitted simultaneously to Brazil’s and Australia’s currencies. 
Figure 11: The effective devaluation of the BRL relative to the AUD and USD 
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
Aug-96
Feb-97
Aug-97
Feb-98
Aug-98
Feb-99
Aug-99
Feb-00
Aug-00
Feb-01
Aug-01
Feb-02
Aug-02
Feb-03
Aug-03
Feb-04
Aug-04
Feb-05
Aug-05
AUD / BRL
USD / BRL
Source: Prof. Werner Antweiler, University of British Columbia 
Brazil’s agriculture development policies – domestic market 
regulation 
The Former Proalcool programme (1975–1997) 
Brazil’s contemporary sugarcane industry developed from 1975 until the late 1990s 
under the control of Brazil’s alcohol programme, known as ‘Proalcool’. Proalcool was 
initially developed to reduce Brazil’s dependence on imported liquid fossil fuels and 
conserve foreign exchange. A secondary objective was to increase the flexibility of 
the sugarcane-based sector by developing an alternative sugarcane-derived product. 
The Proalcool programme was subject to criticism by the World Bank during the early 
1990s.44 Central to this criticism was that the programme encouraged diversion of 
sugarcane to ethanol instead of sugar at a time when international oil prices were 
lower in real terms than they had been when the programme was initiated. 
Subsequently, Brazil’s reliance on imported oil had decreased due to the discovery 
and exploitation of domestic oil reserves. 
Under Proalcool, federal government quotas were allocated annually to each of the 
sugar mills and distilleries. The quotas were earmarked for supply to domestic sugar 
and ethanol markets on a regional basis, and production exceeding quotas was 
available for export (but subject to export taxes). Quotas were allocated annually and 
44 Borell, B. (1991), How a change in Brazil’s sugar policies would affect the world sugar market, 
World Bank policy, research and external affairs working paper, April, WPS 642; , Borell, B., Bianco, 
J.R. and Bale, M.D. (1994), Brazil’s sugarcane sector – A case of lost opportunity, World Bank policy, 
research and external affairs policy research working paper, October, WPS 1363.

- 70 - 
production that exceeded quota was frequently rewarded with an increased quota the 
following year.  
Domestic price points for sugar and ethanol were regulated to divert sugarcane to 
ethanol production. For most years the world freely traded price of sugar exceeded the 
regulated domestic price. In addition, differential tax rates on sugar and ethanol retail 
prices were scheduled on a regional basis. Prior to October 1997, producers in high-
cost production regions were taxed at lower rates, to put into effect a price 
equalisation arrangement. 
During the 1990s, market reforms were introduced throughout Brazil’s agricultural 
sector. The reforms included the liberalisation of export sugar production and repeal 
of sugar price controls in 1995. In 1996 the federal government commenced 
dismantling the interrelated differential regulatory regimes for the sugar and alcohol 
markets, by reducing and subsequently repealing the export tax on sugar and 
deregulating the market for anhydrous ethanol. The aim of these reforms was to limit 
subsidies to a fixed quota per mill, so that ethanol production excess to quotas would 
be sold at market prices.  
In addition to the liberalisation of sugar prices, ex-factory prices for anhydrous 
ethanol were deregulated in May 1997 and the monopoly of the state enterprise 
Petrobras over the exploration of crude oil and refining of petroleum was revoked. By 
1999, the government had liberalised prices of anhydrous ethanol and eliminated 
control over producer prices for sugarcane (although some small direct payments were 
paid to sugarcane growers in the north-east region until 2002). 
By 2002 the Proalcool programme had been completely dismantled. However, the 
government uses several interventions to influence fuel ethanol demand, which affect 
the decision by sugar mills to produce ethanol or sugar from cane.  
As a consequence of abandoning the Proalcool programme, prices of sugar and 
ethanol are now market determined, although ethanol continues to benefit from more 
favourable excise duty treatment than petroleum receives. In addition, the government 
continues to mandate the percentage of ethanol that must be blended with petroleum 
for use as transport fuel.45  
In Brazil, petroleum may not be marketed without the addition of fuel ethanol. The 
government can vary the blending rate of ethanol in petroleum between a minimum of 
20 per cent and a maximum of 25 per cent by volume. In June 2003, the government 
regulated the percentage of ethanol-based products blended in petroleum at 
25 per cent. Other measures to stimulate domestic ethanol demand include banning 
diesel-powered automobiles for private use, offering ethanol storage credit to millers, 
maintaining a differential excise tax rate favouring ethanol over petroleum use, and 
restricting ethanol imports through a 21.5 per cent ad valorem duty and licence 
requirements. 
45 Larson and Borell 2001; LMC International (2005a), Sweetener analysis, October 2005; OECD 
2005b.

- 71 - 
Brazil’s industry post Proalcool 
Brazil’s industry is significantly greater in scale than Australia’s industry. The 
Agricultural Trade Office in São Paulo has forecast Brazil’s total estimated 
production of sugarcane for the market year 2005–06 (May–April) to be 400 million 
tonnes, an increase of around 5 per cent from the previous year due to land expansion 
and favourable weather conditions.  
Brazil’s Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE) and the Agricultural Economics 
Institute of the State of São Paulo Secretariat of Agriculture (IEA) indicates that the 
area planted to sugarcane in 2005 was to be 6.455 million hectares. The area of land 
dedicated to sugarcane cultivation in Brazil since 1996 is summarised in Table 8.  
Table 8: Sugarcane area in Brazil, ‘000 hectares, 1996 to 2005  
1996 
1997 
1998 
1999 
2000 
2001 
2002 
2003 
2004 
2005 
Area  4 831 4 882 5 050 4 975
4 880
5 022
5 207
5 377 6 252 6 455
Sources: IBGE, IEA. USDA Foreign Agricultural Service 2005, Brazil sugar: semi annual, Global 
Agriculture Information Network, 7 October, report no. BR5020. 
The area dedicated to sugarcane production has increased by about 1.6 million 
hectares to nearly 6.5 million hectares since domestic market deregulation in the 
mid-1990s. This increase is equivalent to around three times the area of land devoted 
to sugarcane production in Australia.  
Furthermore, there is general acceptance that the impact on production of seasonal 
variability in rainfall and the timing and duration of frost may be as great as plus or 
minus 15 per cent in an agricultural production system. The scale of Brazil’s industry 
is important when considering seasonal variability. Brazil’s 6.455 million hectares of 
land dedicated to sugarcane cultivation can generate a seasonal variation in production 
that exceeds the total output of Australia’s industry in any season. 
Not only was Brazil the world’s largest producer of sugarcane in 2005 – it is planning 
to appreciably expand its sugarcane industry over the next decade. The IOG is aware 
that Brazil’s Ministry for Sugar, Ethanol and Agro-Energy has declared that 
sugarcane production is targeted to increase from the current output of approximately 
400 million tonnes annually to 600 million tonnes by 2013. The projected expansion 
of Brazil’s industry is depicted in Table 9, which indicates a projected increase above 
2005 production in Brazil of approximately 216 million tonnes of sugarcane. The 
sugarcane production levels estimated in this table may have included an assumption 
of ‘normal’ seasons throughout its timeline. 
By comparison, in 2005, Australia’s industry produced some 38 million tonnes of 
sugarcane.

- 72 - 
Table 9: Projected expansion of Brazil’s sugarcane, sugar and ethanol industry 
above 2005 production levels, 2006 to 2013 
Year 
Sugarcane (tonnes) 
Sugar (tonnes) 
Ethanol (m³) 
2006 
 22 467 000 
 1 450 000 
 1 029 000 
2007 
 45 142 000 
 2 929 000 
 2 059 000 
2008 
 70 934 000 
 4 438 000 
 3 335 000 
2009 
 97 427 000 
 5 976 000 
 4 653 000 
2010 
125 955 000 
 7 546 000 
 6 125 000 
2011 
155 233 000 
 9 147 000 
 7 641 000 
2012 
185 264 000 
10 780 000 
 9 203 000 
2013 
216 053 000 
12 445 000 
10 808 000 
Source: Compiled by Australia’s Embassy in Brazil from statistics provided by DCAA, SPAE and 
MAPA 
The information displayed in Table 9 was modelled by Brazil’s Ministry of 
Agriculture, Livestock and Supply (MAPA) Sugarcane and Agroenergy Department 
(Departamento da Cana-de-açúcar e Agroenergia), to estimate the tonnage of 
sugarcane necessary to supply projected sugar and ethanol demand. MAPA added the 
caveat that production levels will ultimately be decided by the private sector. 
Nevertheless, MAPA’s understanding of the industry suggests that these forecasts are 
consistent with the expansion planned for the next few years. 
Sugar-producing regions 
Sugarcane is produced in 21 of the 26 states of Brazil; however, there are two discrete 
sugar producing regions: the centre-south region and the north-east region. The major 
sugarcane growing areas in Brazil in 2005 are highlighted in Figure 12. Industry 
expansion previously described has taken place in the centre-south region, 
predominately in the states of São Paulo and Mato Grosso do Sul.

- 73 - 
Figure 12: Major sugarcane growing areas within Brazil, 2005 
Source: Czarnikow Sugar 2005 
North-east region 
Brazil’s sugar industry commenced in the north-east region in the seventeenth 
century. Soils in the region are fertile, but the region is prone to drought and requires 
irrigation to achieve consistent yields. The region has poorly developed infrastructure 
and access to capital in the region is limited.46  
In 2005, the north-east region accounts for less than 20 per cent of Brazil’s sugarcane 
production, approximately 25 per cent to 30 per cent of the country’s sugar output and 
approximately 10 per cent of its ethanol output. The states of Pernambuco and 
Alagoas dominate production in the region and account for 80 per cent of regional 
sugar and ethanol production. The crushing season is traditionally at the opposite time 
of year to that of the centre-south. It appears that the north-east is a high-cost 
production region within Brazil and, in future, sugar production may contract in this 
region. 
Centre-south region 
In contrast to the north-east, the centre-south has good soil, topography and climate 
which favour sugarcane production. The largest areas of fertile soils in Brazil, called 
the ‘red earth’ (terra roxa), are found in the states of Paraná and São Paulo. The 
Tropic of Capricorn crosses Brazil at the latitude of the city of São Paulo and the 
centre-south has a semi-temperate climate and reliable high rainfall.  
The natural resources of the region support a grouping of ‘mega scale’ vertically 
integrated sugar-based agribusiness. In 2005 the OECD reported that the centre-south 
had more experienced farmers, higher technology and input use and more adequate 
46 OECD 2005b.

- 74 - 
infrastructure than the north-east region.47 The centre-south has large-tonnage cane 
farms, efficient farming practices, long harvest seasons and large, modern and 
efficient mills.  
Sugarcane production in the region is dominated by the state of São Paulo, where 
sugarcane production has expanded, displacing citrus production. São Paulo 
accounted for 21 per cent of Brazil’s total cane production, producing 5.5 million 
tonnes of sugar and 3.5 billion litres of ethanol, in 2004–05. The centre-south region 
is forecast to produce 355 million tonnes of sugarcane for the market year 2005–06.48 
In 2001 the centre-south region supplied three-quarters of the country’s sugarcane, 
over 70 per cent of the sugar output and approximately 90 per cent of the ethanol.49 
By 2004, the centre-south had expanded to supply 85 per cent of the country’s 
sugarcane, over 80 per cent of the sugar output and approximately 90 per cent of 
ethanol production.50  
Following a recent visit to Brazil, Queensland Sugar Limited reported that Brazil’s 
sugar industry is profitable and is attracting further investment in mills and 
infrastructure, including ports servicing centre-south exports. However, determining 
the exact number of mills entering production is difficult, as mill promoters are 
continually seeking investment capital for projects.  
According to Brazil’s main private sector agriculture representative, the National 
Confederation of Agriculture (CNA), and MAPA, 52 additional sugarcane mills are 
currently planned to be commissioned by 2009. Of these, 32 will be located in 
São Paulo state and ten will become operational during the 2005–06 cropping season. 
By comparison, the Mills and Distilleries Association in the west of São Paulo State 
reports there are at least 33 confirmed new mill projects to be constructed in the state 
by 2011.  
If the projected expansion occurs the region’s output could increase to approximately 
164 million tonnes of cane by 2010, or 28 per cent of the country’s total. Between six 
and 12 mills could come on line by the 2006–07 harvest and augment cane-crushing 
capacity by between 12 million tonnes and 24 million tonnes.51 The crushing season 
in the region was traditionally May to November; however, since 2000 the region has 
moved the start of its crushing to April to ease the tight domestic ethanol supply 
situation.  
The new frontier 
Accompanying the expansion of the sugarcane industry in the centre-south has been 
expansion of the industry into the state of Mato Grosso do Sul. The IOG understands 
the emergence of Brazil’s ‘new frontier’ has led to the reorientation of supply systems 
47 OECD 2005b. 
48 USDA Foreign Agricultural Service (2005), Brazil sugar: semi annual, Global Agriculture 
Information Network, 7 October 2005, report no. BR5020. 
49 Bolling, C. and Suarez, N.R. (2001), ‘The Brazilian sugar industry: recent developments’, Market 
Sugar and sweetener situation and outlook, September, SSS-232. 
50 USDA 2005. 
51 Mills and Distilleries Association of the West of São Paulo (UDOP) quoted in FO Licht (2005), 
International sugar and sweetener report, 15 November, vol 137, no 34.

- 75 - 
within Brazil. New frontier producers are located too far inland to deliver product 
efficiently to export markets; however, these producers can efficiently displace the 
current domestic suppliers.  
The emergence of the new frontier industry has diverted supply of sugar from 
producers in São Paulo into the export market. This has led to substantial investment 
in transport and maritime logistics to service increasing export tonnages. 
Brazil’s industry structure 
Brazil’s government policy has favoured the development of large agricultural 
holdings to generate export revenues. Despite recent policy programmes to encourage 
land tenure by small farmers, land ownership remains highly concentrated in Brazil. 
An outcome of the raft of interrelated government policies, including Proalcool, has 
been the emergence of the largely vertically integrated Brazilian sugar industry.  
According to the São Paulo Sugarcane Agroindustry Union (UNICA), CNA and 
MAPA, there are a total of 350 mills in Brazil. As previously discussed, the exact 
number of mills in production is difficult to determine. The milling units within Brazil 
may be constructed to produce either sugar or ethanol, or both. The distribution of the 
milling units operating in Brazil in the 2004–05 year is illustrated in Table 10. This 
shows that 25 per cent of the mills can produce only ethanol and 69 per cent can 
produce both ethanol and sugar. 
Table 10: Distribution of milling units within Brazil for the crop of 2004–05 
Region 
State 
Ethanol only 
Sugar only 
Both 
North-east 
Alagoas 
2 
5 
18 
Ceará 
0 
0 
1 
Paraíba 
7 
1 
2 
Pernambuco 
4 
4 
19 
Piauí 
0 
0 
1 
Rio Grande do Norte 
1 
0 
2 
Sergipe 
2 
0 
1 
Centre-south 
Minas Gerais 
7 
2 
12 
Paraná 
10 
0 
17 
Rio de Janeiro 
1 
1 
7 
São Paulo 
24 
6 
111 
New frontier 
Mato Grosso do Sul 
3 
0 
6 
Mato Grosso 
4 
0 
5 
Rest of Brazil 
14 
0 
13 
Total  
79  
19  
215  
313 
Percentage of mills 
25% 
6% 
69% 
Source: Compiled by Australia’s Embassy in Brazil from statistics provided by DCAA, SPAE and 
MAPA 
It is difficult to discern whether large sugarcane growers became sugar millers and 
distillers, or sugar millers and distillers invested in land to secure a supply of 
sugarcane. Brazil’s sugarcane growing sector, sugar millers and distillers are

- 76 - 
regarded, for the most part, as effectively being elements of an integrated business. As 
an example, Brazil’s subsidised ethanol storage loans appear to be treated as a 
de facto support measure for the sugarcane sector, given that ethanol is regarded as a 
derivative of the primary agricultural activity.  
As with estimating the number of mills under construction in Brazil, accurate 
quantification of the number of growers supplying the industry is inherently difficult. 
There are significant disparities between MAPA and CNA estimates because a census 
of growers has not been conducted.  
According to CNA, independent growers are responsible for 25 per cent of the 
country’s sugarcane production, with the remaining 75 per cent produced through 
integrated mill ownership. In 2005 Brazil’s industry was reported as having 
324 operating sugar mills ranging in annual sugarcane crushing capacity from 
600 000 tonnes to 6 million tonnes, and 70 per cent of the sugarcane supply to these 
mills was under integrated mill ownership.52  
The concentration of industry production was recognised by a Queensland Sugar 
Limited study tour in 2005 that reported that a typical Brazilian mill was family 
owned, may be managed by professional executives, incorporated a large monoculture 
farm of 12 000 to 20 000 hectares, crushed 1.5 million tonnes to 2.5 million tonnes of 
cane per season in the centre-south region or 0.8 million tonnes to 1.5 million tonnes 
in the north-east region, and sourced between 30 per cent and 40 per cent of its 
sugarcane from independent growers. Queensland Sugar Limited also reported that 
the large, family-controlled integrated milling businesses produce millions of tonnes 
of dedicated sugarcane and supplement supply from smaller independent growers.  
There are differing opinions surrounding the proportion of land allocated to sugarcane 
production by independent growers. These views appear to reflect the diversity of 
Brazil’s farm industry, which ranges from the subsistence-sized farming units 
predominant in the north-east, to the broadacre agribusiness units more common in 
the centre-south and the large-scale enterprises in the new frontier. 
In Brazil the grower is responsible for the cost of transporting sugarcane to the mill, 
as is the case in most other countries, except Australia. Accordingly, the distance to a 
mill is an important factor influencing the decision whether or not an independent 
grower will grow sugarcane.  
Brazil’s economies of scale  
The IOG recognises that Copersucar is a dominant sugar business in Brazil and that, 
arguably, it is the largest sugar and ethanol producer in the world. Copersucar 
produces a diversified range of sugarcane-derived products, utilising modern 
facilities, and owner-operates a port terminal. Copersucar is one of the largest 
sugar-exporting entities in Brazil. This conglomerate consists of 91 associated 
production units, 29 of which are sugar and ethanol production units located in the 
states of São Paulo, Minas Gerais and Paraná. Within the centre-south region in 2004–
05, Copersucar accounted for 18 per cent of the sugarcane (58.4 million tonnes), 
52 Dr Luíz Cortez, Faculdade de Engenharia Agrícola/Center for Energy Planning, State University of 
Campinas.

- 77 - 
17 per cent of the sugar (3.7 million tonnes) and 19 per cent of ethanol 
(2.63 billion litres).  
Copersucar reveals on its website that in 2004–05 it generated USD1.6 billion in 
revenue. The domestic market accounted for 65 per cent of Copersucar’s revenue, and 
Copersucar exported 2.27 million tonnes of sugar during the same period, highlighting 
the scale of Brazil’s industry. 
Other significant sugar businesses include Cosan, Crystalsev and Nova America. 
These business entities have the production capacity in their own right to significantly 
vary the supply of raw sugar to the world market. The continued growth in the scale 
of these businesses appears likely to increase the exposure to the world sugar price. 
Accordingly, Brazil has emerged as a strong voice in world forums advocating 
liberalisation of the world sugar market. 
According to CNA, the level of foreign investment and participation in Brazil’s 
industry is approximately 5 per cent of total capitalisation. However, it should be 
noted that MAPA has advised there are currently two major French companies 
investing in the sugarcane sector in Brazil: The Louis Dreyfus Group, which invests 
in Brazil through its subsidiary Coinbra; and the Tereos Group, which invests through 
its subsidiary company Guarani and a joint-venture company with Cosan. The IOG is 
also aware that the major international commodity trader, Cargill, owns and operates a 
sugar export terminal at the port of Santos. 
Asset utilisation 
The vertical integration of the industry has allowed streamlining of the value chain 
within Brazil’s industry. In many cases the growing and milling sectors appear to 
present as a single business and, in the centre-south region in particular, sugarcane 
production has become a relatively profitable investment stimulating expansion of the 
industry. 
Queensland Sugar Limited reports that most of the sugarcane in Brazil is hand cut 
after burning. Dr Luíz Cortez substantiates this, reporting that 70 per cent of cane is 
hand harvested after burning and 3 per cent of the crop is hand harvested without 
burning. Mechanised cane harvesting accounts for 20 per cent to 27 per cent of the 
overall crop, but may be up to 45 per cent for some mills. Where the cane harvest is 
mechanised the operations are conducted on a 24-hour basis to optimise the capital 
invested.  
A side effect of the development of the ethanol product stream has been the evolution 
of a longer crushing season and increased utilisation of milling assets. Brazil’s mills 
may crush from April until early January, depending upon cane supply and the 
duration of the wet season. A mill has an economic incentive to commence crushing 
to maximise the production of ethanol soon after the end of the wet season and 
continue operations until the commencement of the following wet season.  
Duration of season length is a factor in determining the relative amount of capital 
required to construct a mill. A mill commissioned in Brazil to crush 1.4 million tonnes 
of sugarcane in around nine months requires less capacity measured in tonnes of cane 
per hour than a mill commissioned in Australia that will crush the same volume of

- 78 - 
cane in a five-month to six-month season. Accordingly, the construction of smaller 
capacity milling trains and boilers can be achieved with a smaller capital contribution 
by investors. 
The Proalcool programme actively encouraged investment in capacity for ethanol 
production along with raw sugar production in Brazil’s sugar mills. As indicated in 
Table 10, there are a small proportion of Brazil’s mills that exclusively produce sugar. 
The amount of molasses produced by Brazil’s sugar industry is minimal because the 
non-sucrose content of cane juice that is associated with molasses production is 
diverted to the ethanol production stream by mills with dual production capabilities.  
Investors in Brazil’s mills therefore have the opportunity to incorporate an extra 
10 per cent capacity into the production of the sugar and/or ethanol, with a relatively 
low impact on the total capital investment in the mill. As a result of the 10 per cent 
surplus capacity in the mill there is some capacity to divert a proportion of sugar juice 
to either ethanol distillation or raw sugar production, depending on the relative price 
points in the two commodity markets.  
In addition, cogeneration of electricity has been relatively cheap to install in new 
sugar mills in Brazil. The prices received for electricity exported from mills favour 
this investment, as the mills have extended season length during which electricity may 
be generated and the mills do not compete with local coal for base load electricity 
generation. 
Impact of economic growth 
Observers of the industry are aware of the impact of the relativity of the exchange 
rates between the USD, the BRL and the AUD, which is displayed in Figure 11. 
However, given the scale of depreciation in value of the BRL against the USD 
since January 1999, the appreciation from early 2004 has been relatively small and 
appears to have been offset by appreciation in the AUD over the same period. The 
impact of recent exchange rate variation does not appear to be giving a material 
advantage to Brazil’s producers. Brazil’s currency is fundamentally sensitive and its 
value in late 2005 may be attributed to a relatively high official interest rate regime.  
Inflation-adjusted interest rates in Brazil have been decreasing since 1997. 
The November 2005 meeting of the Banco Central do Brasil’s Monetary Policy 
Committee decided to reduce the Selic reference rate from 19.00 per cent to 
18.50 per cent per annum. This interest rate setting is at lower end of values reached 
in recent years, as illustrated in Figure 13.

- 79 - 
Figure 13: Brazil’s indicator interest rate (Selic) 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
2/01/1998
2/07/1998
2/01/1999
2/07/1999
2/01/2000
2/07/2000
2/01/2001
2/07/2001
2/01/2002
2/07/2002
2/01/2003
2/07/2003
2/01/2004
2/07/2004
2/01/2005
2/07/2005
% per annum
Source: Banco Central do Brasil 
The interest rates displayed in Figure 13 do not appear to have inhibited the increase 
in sugarcane production area of about 1.5 million hectares in Brazil since the 
mid-1990s.  
Brazil’s sugar industry has the capacity to exploit production cost savings that are not 
as readily available to Australia’s industry. An example is the potential to increase the 
mechanisation of the cane-harvesting process. The high percentage of hand harvesting 
within the industry maintains employment within rural areas but can be progressively 
substituted by adjusting the capital–labour ratio of Brazil’s industry. 
Clearly there is scope for more mechanisation of cane harvesting in Brazil. However, 
every mechanical cane harvester displaces 80 jobs for hand cutters, making this a 
contentious issue between mills and labour groups. It is believed that a hand cutter in 
the centre-south earns considerably more than the minimum wage in Brazil.53 
However, other sources indicate that a lower income figure may actually apply. 
Any assessment of rising costs of sugar production in Brazil should address start-up 
costs. Queensland Sugar Limited has reported that the average cost of producing sugar 
for export from mills in the centre-south of Brazil was approximately 4.5 US cents per 
pound in 2002. Queensland Sugar Limited has also reported that the average cost of 
production has been rising in Brazil since 2002 – due to a number of factors, 
including rising land values and labour costs – towards 8 US cents to 9 US cents per 
pound in 2005. Hyperinflation is no longer a threat to or a feature of Brazil’s economy 
and The Economist in November 2005 reported that ‘inflation in Brazil rose to 
6.4 per cent in the year to October.’ 
The IOG accepts that this is an estimate of the average cost of production and 
differentials exist between the efficiency levels of various participants in Brazil’s 
industry. In the past, the industry has demonstrated that it can achieve efficiency 
improvements when challenged to remain competitive. Irrespective of rising costs of 
production in Brazil since 2002, the allocation of further investment funding into 
53 Reuters 8 September 2005 22:06:59 GMT.

- 80 - 
sugar production in the centre-south has been justified by the world sugar price 
indexed on the New York Board of Trade Raw Sugar Futures Contract Number 11 
(NY11) rising from 5 US cents per pound towards 14 US cents per pound.  
The participants within Brazil’s industry are competing amongst themselves. UNICA 
reported in 2005 that ‘a consideration that has been made is the equilibrium prices for 
sugar may be between US 8 and 9 cents per pound in the future’ and ‘the sugar from 
the Centre-South has had the world’s lowest production costs for many years now, 
amounting to US$125 per tonne, for US$1 = BRL 2.8 for the more efficient mills’.54 
Since the date of publication the currency exchange rate has changed, affecting the 
value in USD terms, but the take-home message remains the same. As the new 
frontier develops, a greater proportion of the low–production cost sugar from the 
centre-south is directed to the export market.55  
Influence of Brazil on the NY11 
The NY11 sugar futures contract provides an indication of the surplus from domestic 
sugar production that is available for international trade. The scale of Brazil’s raw 
sugar production is such that the percentage of annual sugar production that Brazil 
exports to the freely traded market (around 50 per cent of total sugar exports) has the 
capacity to influence the international price of freely traded sugar traded (that is, 
the NY11).  
The IOG acknowledges that Brazil’s capacity to ‘switch’ between ethanol and sugar 
production is currently limited to approximately 10 per cent of production. This 
capacity constraint may, however, be overcome by further investment in the mills. 
Nevertheless, the existing capacity to switch 10 per cent of Brazil’s sugarcane 
production between sugar and ethanol is equivalent to the total of Australia’s annual 
production of sugarcane.  
It is worth contemplating the impact on the supply of raw sugar to the world market a 
‘good’ season in Brazil would have if it was combined with mills operating at full 
capacity. Seasonal fluctuations of plus or minus 10 per cent in Brazil are equivalent to 
Australia’s total raw sugar production. The expansion in area committed to sugarcane 
production in Brazil could be expected to have a significant future impact upon the 
NY11 price index for freely traded raw sugar.  
Brazil’s petroleum, ethanol and sugar inter-relation 
Sugarcane production in Brazil increased in the late 1970s in response to the domestic 
demand created for ethanol. Initially the ethanol programme prescribed the use of 
mixtures or blending of anhydrous ethanol with petroleum. This mandate was 
extended by the end of the 1970s to include the use of hydrous ethanol as a petroleum 
substitute for use in cars fuelled exclusively by ethanol. 
At the start of the Proalcool programme, the government fixed the price of petrol 
above that for ethanol. With the easing of oil prices in the late 1980s, and following a 
period of hyper-inflation, government subsidies for ethanol production declined and 
54 Isaias de Carvalho Macedo (ed) 2005 . 
55 Because of the high transport cost to port, the new frontier production is directed to domestic 
markets.

- 81 - 
demand for ethanol-fuelled cars fell sharply. As a result, ethanol production steadied 
after 1985, and peaked in 1998, as the fleet of ageing ethanol-fuelled cars became 
obsolete and was phased out. 
Interest in ethanol production re-emerged in 2002, in part due to the substantial 
devaluation of Brazil’s currency and the attendant increase in imported crude oil costs 
and escalating domestic petroleum prices. An additional factor was the introduction of 
‘flex-fuel’ automobile engines, which are capable of running on either pure hydrous 
ethanol or blends of anhydrous ethanol and petroleum.56 With a favourable price of 
ethanol for domestic consumers, the growth in sales of flex-fuel cars in Brazil has 
exceeded the decline of hydrous fuel cars, creating additional domestic demand for 
fuel ethanol. 
The inter-relationship of sugar, oil and ethanol? 
The relationship between sugar, ethanol and the value of crude oil has been proposed 
as an index of the intrinsic value of sugar. The intrinsic value of sugar appears to be 
increasingly linked to the oil price, although this relationship appears to have 
developed due to the scale of Brazil’s sugar industry and its potential ability to deliver 
sugar to the world market.  
As described previously, Brazil’s sugar industry has developed the capacity to 
produce either sugar or ethanol from cane juice. Accordingly, the margins obtained 
from producing ethanol or sugar influence the proportion of juice directed to 
manufacture either product within the capacity constraints of each mill.  
Brazil produces its ethanol requirements from sugarcane and has a significant 
domestic market for ethanol, due to its population of 180 million and government 
intervention to maintain domestic demand for ethanol. The increasing proportion of 
flex-fuel vehicles in Brazil appears to be developing a new dynamic in Brazil’s 
domestic demand for ethanol.  
It appears Brazil’s ethanol market has both a price insensitive and a price sensitive 
demand for ethanol.57 The demand for ethanol is now influenced by the relative 
consumer cost of petroleum in Brazil, which is linked to the prevailing world price for 
crude oil.  
The price insensitive demand for ethanol within Brazil arises from the mandated  
25 per cent ethanol content in domestic petroleum and the demand for anhydrous 
ethanol from owners of exclusively ethanol-fuelled vehicles. The supply of ethanol to 
this market is independent of the price of petroleum, which is indexed to the price of 
crude oil.58 
The price sensitive demand for ethanol in Brazil is generated where ethanol is priced 
to substitute for petroleum. The demand for ethanol increases where: 
56 Hydrous ethanol includes approximately 4 per cent water content. When ethanol is first fermented 
from sugars, it contains water. Anhydrous ethanol contains no water. 
57 LMC International 2005a. 
58 LMC International 2005a.

- 82 - 
• fuel distributors incorporate anhydrous ethanol in addition to the mandated 
25 per cent content of gasohol 
• drivers of conventionally fuelled vehicles add hydrous ethanol when refuelling the 
vehicle 
• drivers of flex-fuel vehicles use additional hydrous ethanol instead of petroleum 
when the price of hydrous ethanol is less than 60 per cent of the petroleum price.59 
The relative price differential between ethanol and petroleum affects consumer 
demand for ethanol supply that exceeds the off-take required by the statutory 
mandated domestic market. 
An additional factor influencing Brazil’s ethanol and sugar production is increasing 
capacity to supply ethanol to international customers. This market is an emerging 
market and the international demand for ethanol is still being quantified. However, 
Brazil appears to hold a favourable position to meet international ethanol trade should 
this develop. 
The supply of sugar from Brazil’s industry is now linked to price signal awareness 
about demand for ethanol and sugar in the domestic and export markets. The nature of 
ethanol demand in the domestic market is likely to encourage production of ethanol 
when crude oil prices are high. 
It appears that the demand for ethanol in Brazil is causing more cane juice to be 
diverted to ethanol production and less to be used for sugar production. Brazil’s sugar 
industry may derive an unexpected bonus from increasing ethanol production. As 
Brazil’s supply of sugar to the world freely traded raw sugar market has contracted, 
the price of raw sugar has increased, improving the relative returns on crystal sugar 
production. 
The increased profitability generated from the largely vertically integrated sugar 
industry can be expected to lead to higher investment in Brazil’s industry. As 
previously mentioned, Brazil’s Ministry of Sugar, Ethanol and Agro-Energy 
anticipates investment to increase sugarcane production by 50 per cent to 600 million 
tonnes by 2013. To achieve this increase in production a significant capital investment 
will be required, and Brazil has a relatively high cost of financial capital. The 
production of sugar and ethanol from further investment may alter the dynamic of 
Brazil’s domestic sugar and ethanol markets.  
The propensity with which additional capital investment in Brazil’s sugar industry 
generates either ethanol or sugar supply may uncouple the informal indexation of 
freely traded raw sugar and crude oil prices. If the supply of sugar and ethanol 
exceeds demand in Brazil the surplus will be traded on the world market independent 
of the crude oil price regime. 
The freely traded world raw sugar market has to contend with two unspecified 
dynamics determining the modality of the future supply of sugar from Brazil from 
2005 onwards. The first is the rate at which additional sugarcane production is 
commissioned in Brazil and the propensity of this incremental production to exceed 
59 LMC International 2005a.

- 83 - 
future demand for ethanol and sugar. The second dynamic is Brazil’s domestic 
ethanol fuel demand response to any decline in crude oil prices. An easing in demand 
for ethanol, caused by a drop in the relative price of petroleum from a decrease in 
crude oil prices, may increase the quantity of sugar diverted onto the world freely 
traded raw sugar market. 
There is considerable uncertainty about forecasts of future movements of world crude 
oil prices. The August 2005 Report of the Biofuels Taskforce indicates that a 
reasonable range for the long-term world trade-weighted oil price (in 2004 dollars) 
appears to be USD25 to USD45 per barrel.60 A return to these prices for crude oil may 
lead to an uncoupling of the informal indexation of sugar and crude oil prices and, 
consequently, a diversion of Brazil’s surplus raw sugar on to the global market. 
Points arising 
• Brazil is the dominant supplier in the global traded raw sugar market. Its sugar 
industry is the ‘price maker’ for that market and will continue to influence the 
world price through:  
• its significant influence on the NY11, due to its size of crop and industry scale 
• expanding sugar production capacity 
• Brazil’s large domestic market for sugar and ethanol, with a mandated market 
for ethanol 
• diversification of product supply, including bagged sugar, bulk sugar, refined 
sugar and ethanol 
• some capacity for short-term diversion of feedstock in response to prices 
• vertical integration producing efficient asset utilisation  
• modern port facilities.  
• Brazil’s sugarcane-based agribusinesses have favourable investment and market 
conditions for cogeneration of electricity. 
60 Biofuels Taskforce (2005), Final report, report to the Prime Minister the Hon. John Howard MP, 
Commonwealth of Australia

- 84 -

- 85 - 
CHAPTER 5 – AUSTRALIA’S SUGAR INDUSTRY 
Purpose 
To provide a short history of Australia’s sugar industry, the level of statutory 
regulation of the industry and the chronology leading up to Sugar Industry Reform 
Programme 2004, and to define the current status of the industry, its organisational 
structure and positioning within Australia’s agriculture. 
Industry history 
In 1864 sugarcane cultivated near Brisbane became a viable crop and in 1865 the first 
raw sugar mill in Australia commenced operation, at Ormiston near Brisbane. 
Sugarcane was also established in northern New South Wales. After 1870 the focus 
shifted to the Clarence, Richmond and Tweed River valleys. 
By 1885 there were 102 mills in New South Wales and 166 in Queensland. Many of 
the smaller mills were affected by the depression of that year and ceased operations. 
The Colonial Sugar Refining Company established its first mills in 1869 and adopted 
a production model whereby numbers of independent growers entered into forward 
supply contracts for sugarcane. The success of this venture resulted in the central-
milling model becoming the industry norm in New South Wales; the Colonial Sugar 
Refining Company eventually incorporated that model into its Queensland 
operations.61 
Initially Maryborough was the focus of the Queensland sugar industry, but the centre 
of the sugar-growing industry soon shifted to Mackay. By 1874 Mackay had 16 mills 
in operation and nearly 2 000 hectares of land under sugarcane. Cane growing in the 
Herbert River region developed between 1869 and 1872. 
The Queensland Land Act 1876 encouraged a number of farmers to take up 
small-scale homesteads in the sugar districts, generally replacing the plantation 
system of growing and milling. This process was hastened by the introduction of new 
technologies to the milling process, which required increasing capital outlays. This 
consolidated the central mill system as the optimum industry configuration. 
In 1891 the Colonial Sugar Refining Company divided its north Queensland 
Homebush estate into farm-sized blocks and leased them to farmers, with an option to 
purchase the title. This land model was eventually taken up in other regions.  
It is estimated that in 1894 all but 110 of Queensland’s 1 387 sugarcane growers were 
on farms of less than 36 hectares each. By the turn of the twentieth century, the 
majority of cane in the Herbert district was produced by independent farmers on 
blocks of around 65 hectares.62  
Major changes occurred to the industry in the early part of the twentieth century, due 
in part to labour unrest and the sugarcane-pricing regime. More labour was turning to 
61 Biofuels Taskforce 2005. 
62 Newton, R. (1897), Work and wealth of Queensland, p. 56.

- 86 - 
sugarcane for employment opportunities, and new mills opened in Far North 
Queensland, while a change of state government in Queensland and the outbreak of 
World War I also had a significant impact. An important outcome of these changes 
was the imposition of greater legislation and regulation by the state government; some 
of this statutory framework continued into the twenty-first century.  
Between the world wars there was further expansion of the industry, facilitated by 
better transport; prices rose and fell; and Australia’s inaugural major export of raw 
sugar occurred. After World War II, mechanisation in the industry increased, first 
with the bulk handling of raw sugar at selected ports and later, from the 1960s, with 
the expanding use of mechanical harvesting. This resulted in increased productivity 
through to the 1990s, when prices, production and exports were generally high. 
Towards the end of the 1990s the Australian sugar industry was producing around 
5.45 million tonnes of raw sugar per annum from a crush of around 40 million tonnes 
of sugarcane.  
Legislative and review timeline 
1893 Sugar Works Guarantee Act authorises the funding of central sugar mills with 
financial backing by the Queensland Government. 
1915 Queensland Government passes Sugar Acquisition Act and Regulation of 
Sugar Cane Prices Act, which legislate and establish regulatory controls over 
production levels, marketing and pricing. Though not to the same extent, 
regulatory controls are also imposed on wages and working conditions within 
the sugar industry.  
1923 Sugar Board in Queensland, established under the Sugar Acquisition Act 1915, 
takes over the authority to acquire and market all raw sugar produced in 
Queensland. 
1925 Queensland legislation establishes the basis for the future CANEGROWERS 
organisation. 
1937 First International Sugar Agreement is negotiated, but does not come into 
force due to World War II. 
1951 Commonwealth Sugar Agreement is reached with the United Kingdom. 
1969 International Sugar Agreement commences for a five-year term, Australia still 
participates in the International Sugar Organisation. 
1974 Commonwealth Sugar Agreement is terminated. 
1978 Industries Assistance Commission (IAC) conducts an inquiry into the industry. 
1983 IAC conducts a second inquiry into the industry and concludes that 
government assistance to the industry should be substantially reduced; 
1985 Sugar Industry Working Party undertakes a review and makes 
recommendations similar to those of the IAC. The flexibility of some 
regulatory controls is increased. 
1986 Report by the Bureau of Agricultural Economics, Efficiency of transport, 
milling and handling in the sugar industry; states’ regulatory regimes are 
considered to have inhibited the efficiency of the Australian sugar industry. 
1989 Embargo on sugar imports is dismantled and customs tariff is imposed. 
Senate standing committee inquiry is conducted into tariff levels on future 
sugar imports.

- 87 - 
1990 Queensland State Sugar Industry Working Party is convened; its 
recommendations are handed down in June. 
AUD115 to AUD55 per tonne. 
Queensland’s Sugar Acquisition Act and Regulation of Sugarcane Prices Act 
are superseded by the Sugar Industry Act 1991. This Act removes the authority 
of the Central Board, replacing the Sugar Board and the Central Sugar Cane 
Prices Board with the Queensland Sugar Corporation, which is given the 
responsibility to develop and implement policy relating to management of the 
Queensland industry. Also under the aegis of the Sugar Industry Act 1991, the 
Queensland Sugar Corporation is established, on 15 July, ‘to provide 
comprehensively for all matters relating to the promotion and regulation of the 
sugar industry in Queensland’. Although the ‘old’ Acts are repealed, many of 
the practices born of the previous legislation remain and, with the 
discretionary powers provided to the Queensland Sugar Corporation, the 
industry remains, in effect, one of the most highly regulated in Australia.  
Industry Commission review into production, institutional and regulatory 
arrangements in the sugar industry is established. 
1992 Industry Commission report is finalised; the main finding of the report is that 
‘the regulatory controls applying to the production and marketing of raw sugar 
in Queensland’ are the major factor reducing efficiency of the Australian sugar 
industry.63  
Minister for Primary Industries and Energy. 
1993 Sugar Industry Task Force reports to the Australia Government Minister for 
Primary Industries and Energy. The Joint Sugar Industry Infrastructure 
Programme is announced, with assistance of up to AUD20 million; of this, 
AUD19 million is allocated to Queensland projects and the balance to 
New South Wales projects. 
1994 Queensland’s Sugar Industry Act 1991 is amended, making some changes to 
pool prices paid to sugar mill owners in subsequent years and providing for 
quality standards to be set by the Queensland Sugar Corporation.  
enhance competition in Australia, designated as the National Competition 
Policy. This has a significant effect upon all agricultural industries. To meet its 
obligations, the Queensland Government establishes the Sugar Industry 
Review Working Party (SIRWP) to review the Sugar Industry Act 1991 and 
import tariff on sugar. 
1996 SIRWP reports in November 1996, concluding that the Queensland Sugar 
Industry Act 1991 restricts competition in a variety of ways. Over 
70 recommendations are made by the SIRWP review. In part they recommend 
that: 
1. the Queensland Government 
• continue the compulsory acquisition of all raw sugar produced in 
Queensland 
• retain the single-desk seller of domestic and export sugar, subject to 
the pricing of domestic sales at export parity prices 
63 Industry Commission (1992), The Australian sugar industry, report no. 19, Commonwealth of 
Australia.

- 88 - 
• permit growers to negotiate individual agreements with mills and 
transfer their supply to alternate mills, when collective supply 
agreements expire 
imports. 
1998 Sugar Terminals Limited is established as a special purpose vehicle to transfer 
the beneficial interests in Queensland’s bulk sugar terminals and long-term 
leases to the growers and millers, who actually pay for them through 
deductions from sugar pool prices. 
1999 New Sugar Industry Act is passed (effective 1 Jan 2000). 
CANEGROWERS loses its compulsory levy capacity. 
2000 Sugar Industry Amendment Act 2000 establishes Queensland Sugar Limited to 
replace the Queensland Sugar Corporation. 
2002 Independent assessment of the sugar industry (the Hildebrand Report) is 
Forestry. 
2003 Sugar Industry Guidance Group is established to prepare an overarching 
Industry Reform Plan. 
2004 The Queensland Sugar Industry Reform Act 2004 partially deregulates the 
industry to dismantle statutory cane production areas and permits sugarcane 
growers to enter supply contracts with the mill of their choice. It also provides 
for exemption of the compulsory vesting powers when raw sugar is used for 
specified alternatives, such as ethanol and direct consumption. 
The Sugar Industry Guidance Group draft industry report is released. 
2005 The Queensland Government repeals the vesting powers of Queensland Sugar 
Limited (effective from 1 January 2006) and deregulates the marketing of 
Queensland’s raw sugar exports. 
The 2005 repeal of ‘vesting’ should provide the Queensland industry with greater 
options in servicing export markets. Most Queensland mills have entered into supply 
contracts for three years with Queensland Sugar Limited (QSL). In that timeframe, 
participants in the Queensland industry are expected to graduate from a statutory 
relationship to a contractually-based commercial relationship with QSL or a 
marketing entity of their choice.  
Given the new marketing arrangements, the role of Sugar Terminals Limited will 
change as lease arrangements expire in 12 months.  
As can be seen from the legislative and review timetable, over a 100-year timeframe, 
the industry has been highly regulated. Legislation has historically governed most 
aspects of the industry. Development and commercial activity was premised on a 
remunerative price and ‘grower equity’. Prescriptive government regulation can have 
benefits as it establishes rules to manage the behaviour of industry participants. It 
provides certainty, because of the recourse to legal sanctions, and possibly reduces 
compliance costs. It also has potential drawbacks, however, as it may be standardised 
and inflexible and may not adequately allow for a diversity of conditions or changes

- 89 - 
over time. It may also impede progress and innovation. Over time it can generate 
further regulation.64  
The industry-specific regulations and arbitrated decision making have had widespread 
ramifications for the behaviour of industry participants, allowing certain behaviours to 
become regarded as ‘conventional’. Ideally, the move to a deregulated industry means 
that these ‘conventions’ will hopefully become part of the industry’s history, rather 
than its future, and will not become enduring precedents in Australia’s sugar industry. 
Taxation concessions that apply to primary producers 
Australia’s taxation laws apply uniformly to all Australian businesses irrespective of 
their size or nature of business. There are few exemptions, one of which is the 
long-standing concessions available to primary producers.65 These concessions 
recognise the unique circumstances of farming (that is, susceptibility to extreme 
climatic conditions and the vagaries of primary produce markets), and provide 
additional risk management opportunities to alleviate the volatility of primary 
production. The concessions include: 
• Income averaging – allows primary producers to calculate their tax liabilities from 
primary production based on the average income of the current year and four 
preceding years. Averaging is restricted to individuals (that is, persons who carry 
on business as a sole trader, as a partner in a partnership or as a beneficiary in a 
trading trust). 
• Farm Management Deposits – assist primary producers to manage income 
fluctuations caused by climatic and market conditions. Deposits are tax deductible 
in the year of deposit and assessable in the year of withdrawal.  
• Deductible Capital Expenditure – allows primary producers accelerated deduction 
of certain categories of capital expenditure. 
• Cooperatives – provide business structures for primary producers that are taxed as 
companies and pay tax at the company rate (currently 30 per cent). However, they 
are allowed deductions that are not available to other business or incorporated 
entities.  
• The Energy Grants Scheme – provides credits against the excise paid on a range 
of fuels used by a variety of industries, including primary producers.  
These measures provide sugarcane growers the opportunity to manage revenue 
volatility and a means of providing greater stability and certainty to their revenue 
streams over a period of years.  
Where income is not mainly derived from primary production, there are economic 
benefits from retaining an interest in agricultural production. This has had more of an 
impact on Australia’s eastern coastal strip due to the industry’s location and the 
general size of the cane farms. Investment in land may not be solely for its 
cane-growing potential but also because ‘sea-changers’ and ‘tree-changers’ find these 
locations desirable. This has increased, in relative terms, the number of farmers who 
produce sugarcane in low tonnages, which has had an overall effect on costs 
throughout the supply chain and consequences for the region as a whole. 
64 Office of Regulation Review (1998), A Guide to regulation (second edition), Commonwealth of 
Australia. 
65 Income Tax Assessment Act 1997, Division 995.

- 90 - 
Recent government assistance 
A documented history of legislative and financial support provided by Australian 
Government and state governments to the sugar industry includes: 
programme commenced, but operated for only one season. It guaranteed a 
minimum price of AUD230 per tonne of raw sugar in 1985. Up to AUD19 million 
was provided and expended. This funding was repaid by industry.  
• In 1987, the Australian, Queensland and New South Wales governments agreed 
on a three-year industry assistance and restructure package. Total funding of up to 
AUD100 million was made available to those who met the qualification criteria 
for grants, loans and interest rate assistance under certain circumstances. 
• In 1993–94, the Sugar Industry Infrastructure Programme offered assistance of up 
AUD20 million, with AUD19 million allocated to Queensland projects and the 
balance to New South Wales projects. It was matched by the state governments 
and supplemented by industry contributions.  
• In 1998, the Sugar Export Package offered assistance of up to AUD1 million. The 
New South Wales sugar industry develop a greater export focus. The funding, 
paid in June 1999, was a contribution to a joint venture with Grainco to provide 
sugar export shipping facilities by constructing a multi-purpose bulk storage and 
ship-loading facility at Fisherman Island near Brisbane. The facility was 
commissioned on 29 July 1999. 
• In 1998, the Sugar Research Package offered assistance of up to 
AUD13.45 million over four years for priority research in the sugar industry, 
particularly into ways of increasing the sugar content of cane, and a AUD3 million 
assist the New South Wales sugar industry. The programme was fully expended. 
• In 2000, the Sugar Industry Assistance Package offered assistance of up to 
AUD83 million. In excess of AUD60 million was provided under this programme 
during the 2000–01 and 2001–02 financial years. The package included: 
- 
significant interest assistance on loans of up to AUD50 000 used to plant cane 
crops over two seasons  
- 
interest assistance on new or existing loans of up to AUD100 000 associated 
with the business of producing cane  
- 
family relief payments to assist cane farmers and their families  
- 
vouchers of up to AUD1 000 per farmer to provide access to financial 
counselling services, where these services were not already provided  
- 
Farmbis programs to target the cane industry, offering assistance with farm 
skills and business management training.

- 91 - 
• In 2002, the Sugar Industry Reform Programme offered assistance of up to 
AUD120 million. The funding was for various measures, including specific 
income support, business plans, replanting interest rate subsidies, exit assistance, 
regional initiatives and the formation of an Industry Guidance Group. Just over 
AUD26 million was made available under this programme in the 2002–03 and 
2003–04 financial years before it was superseded by the Sugar Industry Reform 
Programme 2004. A domestic levy was introduced on 1 January 2003, with a 
sunset date of 31 December 2007, to fund the reform programme. The levy was 
collected at 3 cents per kilogram on sugar at the point of first sale or transfer from 
the refinery following the refining process.  
• In 2004, the Sugar Industry Reform Programme 2004 offered assistance of up to 
AUD444 million. As at 13 January 2006, approximately AUD225 million had 
been provided. This comprises expenditure for income support, restructuring 
grants, re-establishment grants, business planning, sustainability grants, industry 
groups, crisis counselling and intergenerational transfer components, and funding 
for Regional and Community Projects. 
through the following: 
• Under long-standing research and development (R&D) arrangements, the 
0.5 per cent of the Gross Value of Production (GVP). The 
Corporation were AUD4.463 million in 2002–03, AUD5.12 million in 2003–04 
and AUD4.3 million in 2004–05. 
• Other indirect funding is available to agriculture industries in Australia, including 
the sugar industry, such as various project grants, natural resource management 
funding, ethanol excise rebates, renewable energy credits, and rural financial 
counselling. 
The Queensland Government also provided financial assistance on 28 April 2004 
when it passed the Sugar Industry Amendment Bill 2004. This included a 
AUD33 million sugar reform package comprising: 
• up to AUD13 million for the Sugar Industry Change Management Programme, a 
programme to work with industry at the regional level to identify opportunities for 
change, manage these opportunities and access government services  
• up to AUD10 million for the Sugar Industry Innovation Fund, to assist 
participants to adopt innovative management systems and technologies, increase 
production of value-added products from sugar, and develop more efficient supply 
chains  
• up to AUD10 million for the Farm Consolidation Loan Scheme, available through 
the Queensland Rural Adjustment Authority. 
While these funds were, and in some cases remain, available, it is not correct to 
assume that they have been fully expended or can be further drawn down. 
The sugar industry has been afforded a wide range of periodic assistance and has been 
extensively reviewed on a number of occasions. These reviews have all essentially 
identified the challenges facing the industry and the difficulties of devising

- 92 - 
comprehensive solutions. The complexity of the international trading environment 
and the need to accommodate rapid changes in circumstances makes the development 
of strategic solutions an extremely challenging task. However, given the background 
of a regulatory and/or legislative management structure, the Australian sugar industry 
has tended to rely on government intervention and assistance to address its changing 
circumstances. 
The industry needs to seek its own answers, as some of the solutions lie largely within 
the remit of the industry. There is a need for Australia’s sugar industry to take 
ultimate responsibility for managing its future.  
The adoption of regionally based plans formulated by the Regional Advisory Groups 
(RAGs) is an important development in defining strategies to address future needs of 
the sugar industry, because it demonstrates acceptance of responsibility for the 
development of industry regions. 
Sugar Industry Reform Programme 2002 
In February 2002, an independent assessment of the sugar industry was conducted by 
Mr Clive Hildebrand, the then chair of the Sugar Research and Development 
2000 Sugar Industry Assistance Package. The package allocated up to AUD1 million 
for an independent study to evaluate the future viability of the sugar industry.  
The Independent assessment of the sugar industry report covered a broad range of 
issues and evaluated a wide range of options. The report concluded there was not a 
single or simple pivotal action that would provide a ‘solution’ to the challenges of the 
sugar industry. The report identified that preconditions for a successful industry 
included active industry leadership based on regional rather than sectorial interests, 
planning, and commitment to implement reform with limited scope for government 
intervention to significantly contribute to the resolution of the challenges the industry 
faced. 
There were a number of conclusions and recommendations presented by 
Mr Hildebrand, some of which were already in the process of being addressed. At the 
time of the release of his report Mr Hildebrand observed:  
there is too much reliance on a State-wide approach to industry matters. It is clear that the 
effective operation of each mill area, or mill region, lies almost entirely in the hands of 
the local co-dependent participants. And it is important that this responsibility is accepted 
without resort to wider loyalties. There is no reason why most decisions cannot be made 
independently and locally, and industry and government should take all the necessary 
steps to encourage a greater regional focus.66  
Mr Hildebrand, in his media release of 28 June 2002, emphasised several key 
recommendations, including: 
• rationalising the growing sector of the industry into larger farms or cooperatives 
• implementing a systems approach to all operations, particularly harvest and 
transport logistics 
66 Hildebrand, C. (2002a), ‘Hildebrand presents the reports of the Australian sugar industry assessment 
to the Federal Government’, Media release, 28 June.

- 93 - 
• further encouraging product diversification, particularly through government 
assistance and partnership arrangements 
• urgently improving the industry’s business management skills, especially at the 
local level. 
The Hildebrand Report broadly indicated a future direction for the sugar industry but 
with the proviso that a ‘one size fits all’ approach did not appear the ‘best solution’. 
The report observed that, to a significant extent, the industry needed to identify its 
own specific requirements and best solutions for each region.  
fund the 2002 Sugar Industry Reform Programme and established the Sugar Industry 
Guidance Group (IGG) to drive the reform process, oversee the adoption of a regional 
business approach to industry activities, maintain appropriate communications with 
adjustment necessary to ensure long-term sustainability of the sugar industry.  
Part of the IGG’s terms of reference required it to present an overarching Industry 
Reform Plan. The IGG’s Industry Reform Plan looked at the key drivers that were 
likely to impact most on the industry in the future, and put forward a series of goals 
and strategies to achieve an internationally competitive and sustainable sugar industry. 
The IGG’s Industry Reform Plan was not unanimously supported, although it was 
supported by representatives of the industry’s major stakeholders, emphasising the 
inability of the disparate sectoral interests to agree on important issues for industry 
viability and sustainability. The IGG’s draft Industry Reform Plan proposed the 
following recommendations: 
• The government should implement the recommendations outlined by the 
Sustainable Energy Task Force in its 2001 report.  
• The government should increase the rate of introduction towards the 2 per cent 
Mandatory Renewable Energy Target to encourage further investment, and that 
the 2 per cent renewable target should be increased to 5 per cent. 
• The government should commit to delivery of an initial 2 per cent renewable 
transportation fuel target by 2006, increasing renewable fuel targets to 5 per cent 
by 2010. 
• Renewable fuel certificates be introduced, to help achieve these targets, along the 
lines of the renewable electricity certificates. Renewable fuel certificates should 
be phased in as the ethanol production subsidy expires. 
• The industry should encourage links with other industries to fully explore and 
promote the potential for agricultural industries to contribute to alternative fuel 
and electricity options and Australia’s greenhouse gas reduction commitments.  
• The industry should further develop links with established national organisations 
(for example, Bioenergy Australia) to promote sustainable energy policy settings. 
• Applicants for regional projects are responsible for demonstrating the business 
case for diversification options. When examining diversification proposals, 
Regional Guidance Groups should consider whether applicants can demonstrate a 
secure sugarcane supply and a market demand for the product. 
• The industry should explore all options for on-farm diversification and encourage, 
at the mill area, options for diversifying into other crops, especially those that may

- 94 - 
contribute to soil health and economic viability, without taking land out of cane 
production. 
• The industry should identify niche diversification opportunities – on-farm, 
alternative uses for cane and its by-products. 
Between 1999 and 2003 Australia’s sugar industry experienced a sharp decline in 
sugar prices, a drought, and sugarcane disease and pest outbreaks in parts of 
Queensland. This combination of events had a dramatic impact on the incomes of 
sugarcane growers and sugar producers. There was also a negative view held by 
industry participants of a perceived ‘failure’ to have the issue of the United States’s 
sugar import quotas remedied in the free trade agreement between Australia and the 
United States, and the implied consequences this appeared to have for overall reform 
of the world sugar trade.  
Sugar Industry Reform Programme 2004 
Australian Sugar Milling Council and CANEGROWERS jointly agreed on the need for 
significant reform across all sectors, in a statement of intent (provided at 
Appendix A). The industry agreed to: undertake structural change; promote the longer 
term prospects for the industry as a whole; work to improve its commercial viability; 
rationalise and restructure; support regionally based plans; and explore new 
announced the Sugar Industry Reform Programme (SIRP) 2004, with funding up to 
AUD444.4 million available over five years, for a comprehensive range of measures 
to assist with and facilitate industry reform. The SIRP 2004 is detailed at Appendix D. 
The SIRP 2004 built on the 2002 programme, and responded to the sugar industry’s 
commitment to support and promote comprehensive reform and restructure.  
give the sugar industry the decision-making tools to help individuals determine their 
own futures. It also affirmed that the driver for positive change is in the hands of 
committed individuals working together at the community and regional levels. The 
measures it is providing, work to better position individuals to make informed 
decisions about their future – inside or outside the sugar industry – and act on those 
decisions. 
The SIRP 2004 established the Industry Oversight Group (IOG) to oversee progress 
on the implementation of sugar industry reform, including refinement of reform 
priorities, developing a strategic industry vision and aligning regional plans with an 
Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry on Regional and Community Projects that are an 
integral component of the SIRP 2004. 
The minister announced the appointment of the IOG on 5 August 2004. The IOG 
comprises both industry representatives and independent members.68  
67 The IOG terms of reference are at Appendix B. 
68 A list of IOG members is at Appendix B.

- 95 - 
Consistent with its commitment to maintaining a regional focus, the 
one in New South Wales for delivery of the SIRP. These are: 
• Far North (including all mill areas from Mossman to Tully) 
• Herbert  
• Burdekin  
• Mackay (including Proserpine and Plane Creek mill areas)  
• Bundaberg (including Isis mill area)  
• South (including Maryborough, Moreton and Rocky Point mill areas) 
• New South Wales, covering all the mill areas in northern New South Wales. 
The Ord River region in Western Australia is also recognised as a separate growing 
region under the programme.  
The Regional Advisory Groups (RAGs) were formed, based on this regional 
structure.69 The appointments to the RAGs for each sugar region were completed by 
the end of August 2004. Membership of the RAGs consists of local sugar industry 
representatives and community members. The RAGs were responsible for identifying 
the key challenges facing the sugar industry at the local level, and the most 
appropriate solutions, reflecting the unique circumstances of each region. These 
priorities were brought together in a regional plan for each region.  
The SIRP Sustainability Grant was a single grant paid in two instalments. The 
AUD73 million first-tranche payment of the Sustainability Grant was made 
in June 2004 upon the execution of the Statement of Intent. Acceptance of the 
of the second tranche of the Sustainability Grant. 
Following the submission of finalised plans in September 2005, the Minister for 
Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry accepted the regional reform plans as a solid basis 
for going forward in reforming the sugar industry. The minister stated: 
I am satisfied that the reform process has progressed sufficiently to warrant the 
second payment of the Sustainability Grants, and that these regional plans provide the 
basis to help secure the industry's future viability.  
sustainable and self-reliant industry capable of attracting the people, ideas and capital 
to maintain this industry at the forefront of Australia’s agricultural exports. The sugar 
industry holds the key to its own future and, as a largely deregulated industry, must 
now operate in the global free market system like many other agricultural industries. 
Geographic location 
At the beginning of the twenty-first century, Australia’s sugar industry cultivates 
sugarcane in regions along 2 100 kilometres of Australia’s north-eastern coast, 
ranging from Mossman in Far North Queensland to Grafton in northern 
69 Terms of reference for the RAGs are at Appendix C.

- 96 - 
New South Wales. Since 1996, an emerging sugar industry has been developed in the 
Ord River region of Western Australia.  
Approximately 94 per cent of Australia’s sugarcane is grown in Queensland, 
5 per cent in New South Wales and 1 per cent in Western Australia.70 
In many respects the three discrete geographical areas can be regarded as three 
different ‘businesses’ within Australia’s overall sugar industry:  
• Queensland’s sugar industry is predominately focused on the export of raw sugar; 
around 85 per cent of production is sold overseas 
• New South Wales’s industry is primarily focused on the refined white sugar 
domestic market 
• Western Australia’s total output of raw sugar produced by CJ Ord River Sugar 
Proprietary Limited is exported to associated companies within a larger corporate 
structure in Indonesia.  
Each of the three areas has a different perspective on production and marketing. 
Queensland operates almost exclusively in the international raw sugar market and 
therefore is exposed to its volatility; New South Wales is mainly a supplier of refined 
sugar to the domestic market; while the Western Australian producer acts as a 
managed supplier to a manufacturing arm of its Korean parent company. 
Australia has in excess of 545 000 hectares primarily dedicated to cane cultivation, 
with around 420 000 hectares harvested annually. Since 1988 the area of sugarcane 
harvested in Queensland has increased by over 45 per cent; it now totals more than 
396 500 hectares harvested. Sugarcane growing represents approximately 20 per cent 
of Queensland’s total arable area. Most sugarcane is grown within 50 kilometres of 
the coastline, mainly in high-rainfall areas and around coastal river systems. The 
sugar industry remains important to the economic prosperity of many coastal 
communities, although the economic dependence on sugar-generated income has 
declined for a number of regions. 
Sugarcane-growing areas are distinct, located within districts serviced by the regional 
centres of Cairns, Townsville, Mackay, Bundaberg, Maryborough and the Gold Coast 
area in Queensland; and between Grafton, Ballina and Murwillumbah on the north 
coast of New South Wales. The developing sugar industry in Western Australia is in 
the Ord River region.  
Reliable rainfall or irrigation water is critical to sustainable cane growing. Sugarcane 
accounts for 40 per cent to 45 per cent of total irrigation in Queensland. About 
55 per cent of cane land receives some form of irrigation. It is essential for crop 
growth in the Burdekin area and on the Atherton Tableland in Queensland, and in the 
Ord River region in Western Australia.  
70 Australian Bureau of Agriculture and Resource Economics (ABARE) (2004), Australian Commodity 
Statistics 2004, Commonwealth of Australia.

- 97 - 
Figure 14: Sugar Industry Reform Program Regions  
In most sugar-growing regions the majority of sugarcane is still grown on 
family-based units, usually between 65 hectares and 80 hectares – a scale which can 
be traced back to Queensland’s Land Act 1876. There are disparities: for instance, in 
Queensland’s north there are a number of locations where some farms exceed 
200 hectares. While the total number of cane growers in the Ord River is small, at 
around 20, the average area under cane per farm is in excess of 200 hectares.  
Australia’s agriculture 
The total sugar industry is a relatively small contributor to the Gross Domestic 
Product (GDP) of Australia. Agriculture, forestry and fishing industries contribute 
less than 3 per cent of Australia’s GDP, as illustrated in Figure 15. 
Tropic of Capricorn

- 98 - 
Figure 15: Estimated sectoral contribution to Australia’s Gross Domestic 
Product in 2004–05 
Agriculture, Forestry
and Fishing  2.8%
Mining  4.1%
Manufacturing 
10.6%
Building and
Construction  6.5%
Services  76%
Source: ABARE 2005 
In the 2004–05 financial year the sugar industry contributed AUD1.55 billion to 
Australia’s economy, of which sugarcane production contributed AUD873 million, or 
a modest 2 per cent of Australia’s agricultural production.71 In Queensland, sugarcane 
represents a higher proportion of the state’s agricultural sector; it was around 
8 per cent of state domestic product, or approximately AUD840 million, in 2004–05.72  
Around 80 per cent of the total production of the raw sugar industry is exported in any 
one year; this proportion is quite high when compared with exports of other 
agricultural commodities. The value of raw sugar exports was AUD1.37 billion in 
2004–05, this figure amounts to around 5 per cent of gross agricultural exports for that 
year, one of the higher figures of recent years.73  
The contribution of agricultural production to the national economy has contracted in 
comparison to the increased performance of the mining and tourism sectors. The sugar 
industry’s contribution to regional domestic product was more substantial in the past. 
In relative economic terms, while the sugar industry remains important to many of the 
regional coastal towns of Queensland, particularly the northern regions, the 
introduction of alternative cropping along with growth in the mining and tourism 
industries has reduced the relative importance of the sugar industry to a number of the 
regional centres.  
71 ABARE (2005), Australian commodities, vol 12, no. 3, Commonwealth of Australia. 
72 Department of Primary Industries and Fisheries (2005), Prospects for Queensland’s primary 
industries, Queensland Government 
73 It should be noted that exports for 2004–05 may include stock on hand from prior years. Gross 
exports include unprocessed commodities and manufactured products (freight on board).

- 99 - 
Industry status  
Raw sugar in Australia is produced from sugarcane in three states. Approximately 
94 per cent of total production is in Queensland, 5 per cent in New South Wales and 
1 per cent in Western Australia. There are currently 24 raw sugar mills in Queensland 
(including one mill that processes sugarcane to the syrup stage), three in 
New South Wales and one in Western Australia. Australia, on average, produces an 
estimated 5 million tonnes of raw sugar annually, from 35 million to 40 million 
tonnes of cane (depending on conditions) harvested from 420 000 hectares of land. 
For example, in the 2004 season approximately 5.1 million tonnes of raw sugar was 
produced, generating a gross value of around AUD1.3 billion.  
Raw sugar is the basic material from which further processing produces speciality 
sugars for human consumption, of which white sugar is the predominant product. 
Australia produces and exports these refined sugars. Four Australian raw sugar 
manufacturers are aligned with sugar refiners, two of which are integrated with their 
raw sugar operations. There are two refining operations in Queensland (Mackay and 
Bundaberg), one in New South Wales (Harwood), and one in Victoria (Melbourne). 
Refined sugar is a separate business supplying a differentiated market to that of raw 
sugar.  
The raw sugar industry has in the order of 6 000 business entities, including growers, 
service providers and millers.74 The sugar industry regions vary in numbers of 
growers, scale of farms, yields, harvester numbers and numbers of mills. Raw sugar 
production is confined almost exclusively to the sugar industry of Queensland. 
Therefore, the industry in that state carries the risks and volatility inherent in the 
global freely traded raw sugar market. 
Growing sector 
The growing sector is comprised of between 5 000 and 5 500 owner-operated cane-
growing enterprises. A considerable number of these produce less than 5 000 tonnes 
of sugarcane per annum. In Queensland these relatively small units account for 
55 per cent of enterprises, while in New South Wales the figure is 75 per cent. 
Enterprise scale varies between regions in Queensland: for example, in the Burdekin 
region small-scale units with production less than 5 000 tonnes comprise 22 per cent 
of entities, and in Bundaberg the corresponding number is 79 per cent.  
Overall, cane growers of up to 5 000 tonnes per annum are the numerically dominant 
industry participants. However, growers harvesting between 5 000 tonnes and 
15 000 tonnes (38 per cent of total enterprises) supply the majority of cane in many 
regions – up to 50 per cent of the total cane supply. There are, however, regional 
variations.  
For planning purposes and as a basis of comparison across regions, the IOG sought 
information on the financial status of cane-growing enterprises based on a pool price 
equivalent of AUD250 per tonne of raw sugar. This produced a hypothesis that 
sugarcane growers in the Burdekin region have the highest number of farms with 
74 The IOG was unable to obtain empirical data but believes that these figures reflect the industry’s 
composition.

- 100 - 
positive earnings before interest and tax (EBIT), though they appear to have relatively 
high debt. However, EBIT does not take debt servicing into account, and average 
indebtedness levels are relatively high in regions which have recently expanded 
production. A considerable number of small-scale producers in other regions have 
either a negative return or a small positive return; it is clear that off-farm income from 
sectors including the mining and tourism industries provides necessary income 
support for many participants.  
The total value of Australia’s sugarcane crop has declined in recent years. The gross 
value of production during the 1990s averaged AUD1 007 million; conversely, 
between 2000 and 2005 the average has contracted to AUD877 million. This 
represents around a 13 per cent reduction in the value of sugarcane delivered for 
crushing. In real terms this is a substantial reduction in what was already a relatively 
low gross income per farming enterprise when compared to other agricultural pursuits 
in Australia and general business enterprise earnings. 
Based on the available data and having regard for the RAGs’ regional plans, the IOG 
is of the view that in general terms many of the smaller tonnage enterprises need to 
consider their long-term future in the sugar industry.  
The crushing season (harvesting and processing) is confined to a period of about five 
to six months, mainly June to November, depending on regional climatic conditions 
and arrangements. In recent years the numbers of harvesting enterprises has declined 
but there remain around 1 000 units still in operation in Australia. The 
Hildebrand Report estimated that by implementing efficient utilisation and best 
management practice this could be reduced to 600 units.75 Productivity rates in the 
harvesting sector range from around 13 000 tonnes per harvester to 148 000 tonnes 
per harvester, depending on a number of factors, including topography, historic 
structure of the enterprise, and equipment type, age and configuration. Prices per 
tonne harvested charged to growers are generally averaged by harvesting groupings, 
with variations reflecting the haulage distance – that is, the delivery point of the mill 
transport system. 
Harvesting is mostly carried out during daylight hours, whereas mills operate a 
24-hour day. The rostering and scheduling system also creates inefficient 
transportation of machinery and utilisation of assets and capital. This results in 
sub-optimal utilisation of harvesters, ancillary equipment, delivery infrastructure 
(sidings), rolling stock and locomotives. Bins are often required to function as buffer 
storage for the mill when harvesters are not operating. This can result in protracted 
‘cut-to-crush’ delays, with detrimental impacts on sugar quality and recovery. 
These factors cumulatively result in a cost penalty to the value chain at the harvesting 
stage. This penalty is transmitted to cane transport costs and further compounds the 
transport cost impacting on the value chain. 
Milling sector 
Sugarcane is crushed at 28 Australian mills, 24 in Queensland, three in 
New South Wales and one in Western Australia. Ownership of the mills has become 
75 Hildebrand 2002b, p. 25.

- 101 - 
more concentrated in recent years. In 1980, 19 companies operated 33 mills, whereas 
today 12 companies operate 28 mills. Farmers’ cooperatives or companies 
predominantly owned by growers (for example, Tully Sugar Limited) currently 
control 13 mills producing 40 per cent of Australia’s raw sugar. Operating sugar mills 
in 2005 are detailed in Table 11.

- 102 - 
Table 11: Operating sugar mills in 2005 
Mill 
Region 
Approximate 
proportion of 
Australian 
crush  
Current 
ownership 
Structure 
Mossman 
1% 
Mossman Central 
Mill Company Ltd
Australian Public 
Company. 
Limited by shares. 
Mulgrave 
3% 
The Mulgrave 
Central Mill 
Company Ltd 
Australian Public 
Company. 
Limited by shares. 
Tableland 
Babinda 
Mourilyan 
South 
Johnstone 
9% 
Bundaberg Sugar 
Ltd 
Australian Public 
Company. 
Limited by shares. 
[Wholly owned by 
Finasucre since 
2000, a family-
owned company 
incorporated in 
Belgium.] 
Tully 
Far North 
6% 
Tully Sugar Ltd 
Australian Public 
Company. 
Limited by shares. 
Macknade  
Victoria 
Herbert  
14% 
Invicta 
Kalamia 
Pioneer 
Inkerman 
Burdekin 
22% 
Plane Creek 
4% 
CSR Ltd (CSR) 
Australian Public 
Company. 
Limited by shares. 
[CSR Ltd is a 
manufacturing 
company; it has 
three principal 
businesses of 
which CSR Sugar 
through 
subsidiaries owns 
and operates its 
sugar mills.] 
Proserpine 
5% 
Proserpine 
Cooperative Sugar 
Milling Assoc Ltd 
Registered 
Australian Body. 
Pleystowe 
Farleigh 
Marian 
Racecourse 
Mackay 
17% 
Mackay Sugar 
Cooperative 
Assoc Ltd 
Registered 
Australian Body. 
Millaquin 
Bingera 
Bundaberg 
5.5% 
Bundaberg Sugar 
Ltd 
Australian Public 
Company. 
Limited by shares. 
[Owned by 
Finasucre since 
2000, a family

- 103 - 
owned company 
incorporated in 
Belgium.]  
Isis 
Bundaberg 
3% 
Isis Central Sugar 
Mill Company Ltd
Australian Public 
Company. 
Limited by shares. 
Maryboroug
h 
2% 
The Maryborough 
Sugar Factory Ltd 
Australian Public 
Company. 
Limited by shares. 
Rocky Point 
South 
1% 
WH Heck and 
Sons Pty Ltd 
Australian Public 
Company. 
Limited by shares. 
Privately owned. 
Condong  
Broadwater 
Harwood 
New South
 Wales 
5.5% 
New South Wales 
Sugar Milling 
Cooperative Ltd  
Cooperative 
Society. 
Ord River 
Western 
Australia 
1% 
CJ Ord River 
Sugar Pty Ltd 
Australian 
Proprietary 
Company. 
Limited by shares. 
[Wholly owned by 
the parent 
company, Cheil 
Jedang, a South 
Korean company.] 
Note: 
These profiles are based on the Australian Securities and Investment Commission index and 
the companies’ own information. 
In respect of the above table differential taxation regimes apply to the cooperative and 
corporate business structures although essentially they are all conducting similar 
businesses. 
In the last 20 years, seven Queensland mills have ceased to operate – Qunaba (1985), 
Goondi (1987), North Eton (1988), Cattle Creek (1989), Hambledon (1991), Moreton 
(2003) and Fairymead (2005). The causes of the closures varied, and included low 
prices and insufficient cane supply; ultimately, there was a loss of viability for the 
mills. Only one of these closures resulted in the loss of cane growers to the industry; 
in all other cases the cane supply was diverted to another mill. 
Two new mills have been constructed, one in the Ord River region (1995), and one in 
the Atherton Tablelands (1998) that processes only to the syrup stage. 
The majority of Australia’s mills are dated in terms of their basic structures and 
production facilities. The oldest mill operating commenced crushing in 1874; the 
majority of the current operating mills commenced operations in the period 1875 to 
1925.76 Though investment has occurred over the years, and updates to the operating 
76 Some mills were moved from their original sites to their present locations, dates refer to their current 
locations.

- 104 - 
plant have taken place, this has generally been in response to cane land expansion and 
necessary maintenance. While there has been extensive automation of mills and 
technical enhancement to some mills, there has been limited replacement of installed 
plant, due to capital constraints. Cogeneration of electricity has been used as an 
independent special purpose vehicle to finance the replacement of boiler capacity and 
improvements in thermal efficiency in older mills. The return on investment on 
cogeneration of electricity can capitalise the replacement of boiler assets as part of the 
renewable energy value chain. 
The milling sector in Queensland has a significant infrastructure investment in a series 
of cane railway track networks and rolling stock. There is approximately 
4 000 kilometres of narrow-gauge track in Queensland. As the cost of cane transport 
continues to be borne by the mill, there is little incentive for growers to assist in 
optimising the cost and utilisation of this infrastructure. For example, a farm 
producing 1 200 tonnes of cane may have a dedicated siding, as may a farm producing 
80 000 tonnes, though the respective costs to the mill are vastly different. This is 
historically based, as traditionally sidings were provided without regard to the 
economies of scale, and there remains a resistance to reducing the number of sidings 
to gain efficiencies in transport. Some regions are addressing this issue but there is the 
opportunity to capture efficiency gains in many regions. 
The dedicated sugarcane rail infrastructure provides a net contribution to the broader 
community by diverting cane transport from public transport infrastructure to a less 
community-intrusive form of logistics. There are sugar regions which rely solely on 
road transport and this is likely to increase as cane growing areas become isolated. 
Sugar industry organisations 
The Australian sugar industry has a number of organisations that provide services 
and/or advocacy on behalf of the sugar industry. Following is a listing with a brief 
profile of each. 
Australian Cane Farmers’ Association 
Established in 1987, the Australian Cane Farmers’ Association (ACFA) is a voluntary 
and independent association dedicated to protecting its members’ interests. Its 
members comprise cane farmers from New South Wales and Queensland. It maintains 
communication to members through regional meetings and the Australian Sugar 
Digest.  
Australian Sugar Milling Council 
The Australian Sugar Milling Council (ASMC) was established in 1987 to represent 
Australian raw sugar mill owners in domestic and international forums. All of 
Queensland’s raw sugar mills are currently members of this voluntary organisation.  
The ASMC is a policy forum for mill owners. Services provided to mill owners 
include industry statistical data; industrial relations; workplace health and safety; 
professional advice, including legal and taxation; public relations; and representation 
to government and statutory bodies. The ASMC draws on representatives from all 
Queensland sugar regions to determine policy and to appoint mill staff to 
professional/advisory committees. The ASMC works with relevant industry 
organisations to develop policies to enhance the progress of the raw sugar industry.

- 105 - 
Bureau of Sugar Experiment Stations 
In addition to a head office located in Brisbane, the Bureau of Sugar Experiment 
Stations (BSES) operates seven sugar experiment stations and ten extension centres in 
major cane-growing districts. The functions of the organisation are: 
• to conduct research into cane growing, with the aim of improving the efficiency of 
sugar production 
• to communicate the results of research to cane growers and sugar millers 
• to administer regulations concerning plant quarantine and pest and disease control. 
As one of the Australian sugar industry’s providers of R&D and extension, BSES is 
committed to increasing the productivity, profitability and sustainability of the 
industry and the transfer of technology to sugarcane-growing practices and raw sugar 
milling. 
Caneharvesters 
Caneharvesters incorporates the Queensland Mechanical Caneharvesters Association 
and is the representative of cane harvesters and haulers. The association, which was 
established over 25 years ago, is a voluntary organisation. The membership currently 
represents 43 per cent of the crop harvested annually in Australia, and consists of 
persons or organisations involved with the harvesting or hauling of sugarcane by 
mechanical means. The major objectives of the association are: 
• to promote the general and material welfare of members 
• to establish and promote harvesting contracts to ensure the security of all parties 
• to keep members up to date with the latest technology in harvesting and hauling 
• to improve the representation of members at the industry level. 
Cane Protection and Productivity Boards 
Cane Protection and Productivity Boards (CPPBs) were set up in all cane-growing 
districts of New South Wales and Queensland except the Atherton Tablelands. Each 
board consisted of representatives from the milling and growing sectors and BSES, 
and employed staff to assist with disease and pest control. Staff were also involved in 
assisting growers to improve their productivity. The CPPBs and BSES worked closely 
together to achieve the best results possible for the industry.  
A CPPB provides advice and help to cane growers within its area about the 
prevention, control and eradication of pest infestation of cane or any other matters that 
adversely affect the quantity or quality of crops of cane. Each board helps and 
cooperates with other organisations involved in cane pest and disease research, and 
the production, harvesting, transport and processing of cane. CPPBs also provide 
advice and information about the preservation and enhancement of the capacity of 
land to sustain crops of cane. 
Changes have taken place to the structures of CPPBs in Queensland with legislation in 
2000 allowing for their incorporation into non-statutory entities. A number have taken 
this path and others have amalgamated and taken on a more commercial focus.

- 106 - 
Cooperative Research Centre for Sugar Industry Innovation through 
Biotechnology 
The Cooperative Research Centre (CRC) for Sustainable Sugar Production was 
established in 2003 as a cooperative research network designed to enhance the future 
sustainability of Australia’s sugar industry. This superseded the CRC for Sustainable 
Sugar Production which was established in 1995. 
The current CRC’s research, education and commercial efforts are aimed at 
combining Australia’s strengths in molecular genetics, sugarcane biology, agriculture, 
and industrial extraction, to construct the essential platform of scientific 
understanding, intellectual property and commercial linkages that will underpin a 
value-added sugarcane industry. 
New South Wales Cane Growers’ Association 
The New South Wales Cane Growers’ Association was formed during the 1920s and 
comprises three separate branches (Clarence River, Richmond River and 
Tweed River), which act independently within their legal structures. All assignment 
holders in New South Wales are required to be financial members of the appropriate 
branch for their production area entitlement. The objectives of the New South Wales 
Cane Growers’ Association include: 
• protecting the interests of cane growers  
• promoting combined action for all parties interested in growing sugarcane for the 
advancement of the industry 
• advising on any question in relation to the industry 
regulatory/legislative issues affecting the industry 
• acting as an intermediary between members and the New South Wales Sugar 
Milling Cooperative Limited in all matters affecting the wellbeing and stability of 
the sugar industry in New South Wales 
• disseminating information to all cane growers. 
The council of the association consists of four representatives from each branch 
executive. 
Queensland Cane Growers’ Organisation Limited 
The organisation was established in 1925 under state legislation and funded through a 
compulsory levy system. Under the Sugar Industry Act 1999, the statutory 
compulsory levying arrangements were repealed, and in 2000 the organisation became 
a private entity with a voluntary membership. The organisation is a public company 
limited by guarantee, representing the majority of growers of cane, and is more 
commonly known as CANEGROWERS. It provides a wide range of services on behalf of 
its members, such as collective bargaining with mill owners at local and industry 
Queensland Government and formulates submissions when and where necessary. It 
represents the majority of growers in domestic and international forums. 
Queensland Sugar Limited 
Located in Brisbane, QSL is one of the world’s largest raw sugar marketers. QSL 
markets Queensland’s annual production of between 4 million and 5 million tonnes of

- 107 - 
raw sugar to domestic and export customers. QSL is a company limited by guarantee, 
with millers and cane growers equally represented on the board. 
The Queensland Government’s legislated vesting authority in QSL ceased from  
1 January 2006, and marketing of raw sugar from the 2006 crushing season will be 
subject to commercial contractual arrangements. 
Sugar Research and Development Corporation 
The Sugar Research and Development Corporation (SRDC) funds R&D projects 
aimed at producing outcomes that benefit Australia’s sugar industry and, more 
broadly, Australia’s community. Areas of interest include sugarcane improvement, 
improved crop management and protection systems, improved harvesting and 
transport, enhanced efficiency of sugar manufacture, enhanced marketability, 
improved environmental and natural resource management and improved whole-of-
industry competitiveness. 
SRDC takes a strategic view of the needs and opportunities for R&D in the sugar 
industry and is a conduit for focused research funding. SRDC does not take a direct 
role in research.  
Sugar Research Institute 
The Sugar Research Institute (SRI) was founded in 1949 and is the major provider of 
sugar milling R&D in Australia. SRI was a commercial R&D company, controlled by 
the majority of raw sugar mills in Australia, who are its members. SRI’s activities 
included fundamental, strategic and commercial research projects, which addressed 
the short-term and long-term needs of the member sugar mills. It also provided 
consultancy and design services and manufactured a limited range of equipment for 
the industry. 
SRI’s staff consists mainly of engineers and chemists, supported by technicians and 
administrative staff. Most staff members have professional qualifications in chemical, 
mechanical, civil or electrical engineering, chemistry or microbiology. SRI has 
well-equipped facilities, including laboratories, electronics workshops and computing 
facilities. 
SRI has now linked with the Queensland University of Technology in Brisbane. This 
has involved a change of name, to Sugar Research and Innovation. The move was a 
response to a reduction in research funding from members, and a need to maintain 
critical research capability. 
Sugar Terminals Limited 
Sugar Terminals Limited (STL) is a public company and presents as a service utility. 
It is controlled by Queensland growers and millers. STL was incorporated in 1998 and 
started commercial operations in August 2000. It was established as a vehicle to 
transfer Queensland’s bulk sugar terminals and long-term leases to the growers and 
millers, who actually paid for them through deductions from sugar pools over time.

- 108 - 
STL, according to its 2005 annual report, has current assets (depreciated present 
value) of around AUD380 million in seven bulk sugar terminals in Queensland.77 It 
owns the bulk sugar terminal buildings, fixed plant and equipment at each terminal 
and leases bulk sugar terminal land at Cairns, Mourilyan, Lucinda, Townsville, 
Mackay, Bundaberg and Brisbane. QSL is charged commercial rent for the use of 
these facilities. The STL Board has a current policy to pay shareholders annually, 
from the net profit for the period, as high a dividend as possible, having regard to the 
company’s cash position. 
Research and development 
As previously indicated, there are a number of R&D organisations dedicated to the 
sugar industry. In conjunction with governments there has been heavy industry 
investment in R&D and extension programmes. The aggregate level of R&D and 
extension expenditure within Australia’s sugar industry is estimated to be in the range 
of 3 per cent to 5 per cent of the gross value of raw sugar production.  
The IOG notes, however, that despite the resources invested in developing all aspects 
of cane growing, sugar yields both per tonne of cane and per hectare appear to have 
reached a plateau. In particular, sugar content has not improved on levels achieved in 
the 1930s. 
The existing service providers have focused the majority of resources on activities 
relating to sugarcane growing and supply. The recent falls in income to industry 
stakeholders and rationalisation of services have brought about a number of changes 
amongst the providers of R&D programmes.  
The BSES was established in Queensland in 1900 to provide R&D and extension 
services to the industry. In more recent decades, the BSES’s involvement in 
milling-related research has largely ceased and the focus has been on the development 
of a sustainable sugarcane production system and reliability of supply. The 
Queensland Government, through the Department of Primary Industries and Fisheries, 
has traditionally assisted in the financing of the BSES. 
The SRI has joined with the Queensland University of Technology in Brisbane and 
has undergone a name change. The Sugar Research and Development Corporation is 
levy with dollar for dollar matching, up to 0.5 per cent of GVP, by the 
Biotechnology is funded by industry and commercial groups and the Australian and 
state governments.  
These R&D agencies are competing for fewer funding dollars and there may be a 
need to consider further rationalisation to ensure that industry obtains the optimum 
return on its R&D capital investment and contributions. 
77 Sugar Terminals Limited (2005), Annual Report 2004–2005, Sugar Terminals Limited, p 15.

- 109 - 
Points arising 
• Australia’s sugar industry has a history of legislation and regulation. 
• Regulation tends to mask commercial market and economic signals. 
• The past 20 years have seen nearly all of the industry’s production exposed to 
cyclically volatile world market prices.  
• There has been a succession of reviews and protracted assistance packages from 
governments. 
• The outcomes of the sequence of reviews and reports into the industry have 
identified the complexity of the challenges the sugar industry faces and agreed 
that comprehensive solutions are difficult to identify and effect. 
• The sugar industry in total is a relatively modest, declining contributor to 
Australia’s GDP. 
• Around 95 per cent of Australia’s raw sugar is produced in Queensland and the 
majority of that is exported through Queensland’s sugar terminals. 
• Industry production and location is constrained in part by geography, climate and 
infrastructure. 
• Many smaller tonnage enterprises need to consider their long-term future in the 
sugar industry. 
• Harvesting inefficiencies, and how they are transmitted to cane transport costs and 
compound cost penalties in the value chain, need to be considered. 
• In many cases the mills’ installed plant is dated and capital for re-equipment and 
restructure is difficult to justify, source and service. 
• There are a large number of organisations in the sugar industry but there is an 
absence of an overarching body representative of the value chain. 
• Sugar price is determined in a cyclical, volatile world commodity market. 
• As statutory vesting authority ceased from 1 January 2006, QSL needs to consider 
reviewing its structure and its relationship with suppliers. 
• R&D bodies need to consider a more commercial approach to ensure the 
cost-effective allocation of scarce funding.

- 110 -

- 111 - 
APPENDIX A 
REFORM OF THE AUSTRALIAN SUGAR INDUSTRY  
STATEMENT OF INTENT 
industry will actively pursue long term economic, social and environmental 
sustainability by  
• 
undertaking significant reform across all sectors;  
• 
comprehensively rationalising and restructuring its operations;  
• 
diversifying its economic base; and  
• 
adapting to its new operating environment.  
The industry agrees that:  
• 
It will undertake structural change, crucial to the industry’s future, based on a 
strong mill area and regional focus of operations.  
• 
Some industry participants will need to re-establish themselves in the new 
operating environment and that this in turn will promote the longer-term prospects 
for the industry as a whole.  
• 
Growers, harvesters and millers will critically examine their businesses and work 
to improve their commercial viability.  
• 
Rationalisation and restructuring, which will enhance revenue and cost efficiency 
and facilitate environmental and social sustainability, will be undertaken through a 
“whole-of-system” regional approach.  
• 
It will support the adoption of regionally-based plans to be developed and 
implemented through Regional Advisory Groups. These plans will strongly reflect 
local priorities and help achieve the necessary changes to sustain regional 
communities.  
• 
Raw sugar continues to be the industry’s core business, however there will be a 
serious exploration of new opportunities for the alternative uses for sugarcane, 
current sugarcane land and value adding opportunities.  
a Sustainability Grant, which will help industry through a transition phase.  
assistance measures to assist with and facilitate industry reform – through 
diversification, re-establishment and restructuring. The Sugar Industry Reform 
Program 2004 will be in addition to more than $80 million in assistance provided 
since 2000, as well as ongoing research and development support and assistance 
industry endorses these assistance measures.  
The Australian sugar industry recognises that payment of the second instalment of the 
Sustainability Grant scheduled for January 2005 will occur once the 
development of regional plans.

- 112 - 
Industry leadership commits to:  
• 
Ensuring the broader industry takes ownership of and drives the reform process.  
• 
Actively communicate the options available to industry participants.  
• 
Encourage all industry participants to avail themselves of the further opportunities 
being provided, to work to better position the industry’s future and to act upon 
reform-based decisions.

- 113 - 
APPENDIX B 
Industry Oversight Group  
OVERVIEW 
1. The Industry Oversight Group will oversee progress on the implementation of 
sugar industry reform, including the refinement of reform priorities, development 
of a strategic industry vision and alignment of regional plans with that vision. 
2. The Industry Oversight Group will liaise with Regional Advisory Groups and 
assess proposals from regions for Regional and Community Projects, making 
recommendations to the Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry on 
projects to be supported under this program. 
Oversight Group to discharge its responsibilities within the terms of reference, 
including undertaking or commissioning priority work as identified. 
Oversight Group and facilitate ongoing high-level advice as required. 
MEMBERSHIP 
5. Membership of the Industry Oversight Group will be at the invitation of the 
Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry. 
6. The Group will comprise up to seven persons, including the Chair, with 
capabilities including: 
• 
strong business expertise at a senior level, including investment and strategic 
planning;  
• 
a demonstrated capability to increase the profitability, competitiveness and 
sustainability of Australian agri-business;  
• 
proficiency in change management and capacity building, including 
innovation and diversification; and 
• 
an understanding of the linkages between industry competitiveness and a 
sustainable natural resource base and stronger rural and regional communities.  
7. One member will be selected to provide the perspective of the cane growing 
sector.  
8. One member will be selected to provide the perspective of the milling sector. 
9. The remaining members will be selected on the basis of their strength in the 
capabilities set out in item 6 above and will provide an independent and arm’s 
length perspective to the Group; 
10. The Chair will be an experienced person from the commercial sector with strength 
in the capabilities set out in item 6 above.

- 114 - 
TERMS OF REFERENCE 
11. The Industry Oversight Group will oversee progress on the implementation of 
sugar industry reform, including the refinement of reform priorities, development 
of a strategic industry vision and alignment of regional plans with that vision. 
12. The Industry Oversight Group will drive reform and change, including the 
alignment of regional business priorities and plans against the following priority 
areas: 
• 
An integrated production systems approach to industry reform  
• 
Appropriate business structures that streamline industry operations, improve 
efficiencies and/or economies of scale to facilitate improved competitiveness  
• 
Innovation and diversification, focussing on both on-farm revenue 
diversification and on products derived from sugar cane, which can contribute 
to sugar regions’ longer-term economic, social and environmental health 
• 
Enhancing the sustainability of the industry’s natural resource base. 
13. The Industry Oversight Group will work with Regional Advisory Groups to 
develop regional priorities and plans aligned with the above over-arching 
priorities. 
• 
Regional Advisory Groups must report progress on the development of 
regional priorities and plans by 30 September 2004 and 30 November 2004; 
• 
The Industry Oversight Group will then provide advice to the Minister on 
progress with industry reform. 
14. The Industry Oversight Group will examine proposals from Regional Advisory 
Projects assistance and make recommendations on these to the Minister for 
Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry. 
15. The Industry Oversight Group will provide advice to the Minister on priorities and 
key programmes as necessary.

- 115 - 
Industry Oversight Group Membership 
NAME 
MEMBER 
Bruce Vaughan AO Chair – Independent 
Aivars Blums 
Deputy Chair – Independent 
Alf Cristaudo 
Member – Representing the perspective of the cane growing  
 sector 
Geoff Mitchell AO 
Member – Representing the perspective of the milling sector 
Vivienne Quinn 
Member – Independent 
Raoul Nieper 
Member – Independent

- 116 -

- 117 - 
APPENDIX C 
Regional Advisory Groups  
OVERVIEW 
1. Regional Advisory Groups will be appointed to identify the key challenges facing 
the sugar industry and the community at a local level and the most appropriate 
solutions which reflect the unique circumstances of each region. 
2. Regional Advisory Groups will initially develop regional industry priorities with 
the subsequent view to developing a regional business plan. 
3. Regional Advisory Groups will examine Regional and Community Projects 
proposals and provide advice to the Industry Oversight Group on projects to be 
supported under Regional and Community Projects. 
4. Whilst acting for the Regional Advisory Groups, members will uphold the best 
interest of the region over the commercial, professional or private interest of any 
individual or stakeholder group. 
secretariat support to the Regional Advisory Groups. 
MEMBERSHIP 
6. Membership of Regional Advisory Groups will be at the invitation of the Minister 
for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry. 
7. Each group will comprise approximately seven persons and may be drawn from: 
• 
existing successful regional industry reform initiatives 
• 
the local Area Consultative Committee 
• 
other local industry and community groups 
8. Membership will be based on skills including: 
• 
financial and strategic planning 
• 
change management and capacity building, including innovation and 
diversification and economic development 
• 
environmental and natural resource management  
• 
understanding of local industry issues and priorities 
• 
understanding of local community issues and priorities

- 118 - 
TERMS OF REFERENCE 
9. Regional Advisory Groups will develop regional industry priorities and plans, in 
consultation with the Industry Oversight Group. These will include: 
• 
a framework that will deliver improved environmental, social and economic 
outcomes in the region; 
• 
a program for ensuring the adoption of a whole of industry systems approach 
for pursuing efficiency, productivity and profitability gains; 
• 
a realistic assessment of a region’s capacity to produce and export raw sugar 
against “worst case scenario” forecasts; 
• 
examination of the alternatives for the sugar industry, including alternative 
crops and alternative economic activities; and 
• 
a program for developing the business skills and capacity of industry 
participants. 
10. In articulating its regional priorities and plans, each Regional Advisory Group 
must identify the actions that local stakeholders are currently undertaking, and 
will in future undertake to implement them, including specific and measurable 
milestones, timeframes, and performance indicators. 
11. Regional Advisory Groups must report progress on the development of regional 
priorities and plans to the Industry Oversight Group by 30 September and  
30 November (and before funding under Regional and Community Projects can 
proceed). 
• 
approved the Regional Business Plan, each Regional Advisory Group will be 
required to oversee its implementation and, as appropriate, further 
development. 
12. Regional Advisory Groups will maintain communication with the Industry 
Oversight Group. 
13. Regional Advisory Groups will report on progress in achieving reform in regional 
industry operations to the Industry Oversight Group at 31 December and 
30 June each year from the commencement of Regional and Community Projects. 
• 
beyond 2004-2005, provision of further Regional and Community Projects 
assistance will be contingent upon demonstrable progress towards 
implementation of regional plans. 
Regional Advisory Groups including: 
• 
administrative support with processing of Regional and Community Project 
proposals; 
• 
• 
secretariat support.

- 119 - 
APPENDIX D  
Sugar Industry Reform Programme 2004 
Overview 
industry to rural and regional Australia. It agreed to provide a comprehensive range of 
measures to help the industry reform and assist individual cane farmers and their 
families who are in need. 
The industry is a significant exporter and a major focus of the economies of many 
regional towns. The Government and the industry agreed on the need for significant 
reform in several areas. The industry has undertaken to develop and implement 
genuine, realistic and regionally based reforms that strongly reflect local priorities, to 
help achieve the needed changes and ensure the industry’s long-term economic, social 
and environmental sustainability. 
Sugar Industry Reform Programme 2004 
The Sugar Industry Reform Program 2004 builds on the 2002 program, and responds 
to the sugar industry’s commitment to support and promote comprehensive reform 
and restructure as formalised through the Statement of Intent signed by industry 
It provides up to $A444.4 million for a range of measures to assist the Queensland, 
New South Wales and Western Australian sugar industries. Importantly, all industry 
stakeholders have the opportunity to participate in the reforms. Assistance is provided 
through a combination of short-term measures to help sustain the industry through its 
immediate difficulties, and longer-term measures to help the industry undertake 
necessary reform. 
The Sugar Industry Reform Program 2004 gives the industry the decision-making 
tools to help individuals determine their futures. The driver for positive change is in 
the hands of committed individuals working together at the community and regional 
the appropriate measures it is providing, work to better position themselves to make 
informed decisions about their future – inside or outside the sugar industry – and act 
on those decisions. 
In acknowledging the critical role of industry and communities in determining their 
(IOG) as well as seven Regional Advisory Groups (RAGs) with support funding of up 
to $A8 million. 
• The IOG oversees progress on the implementation of sugar industry reform, 
including the refinement of reform priorities, development of a strategic industry 
vision and alignment of regional plans with that vision.  
• RAGs consists of local sugar industry and community members and are 
responsible for identifying the key challenges facing the sugar industry at a local 
level and the most appropriate solutions which reflect the unique circumstances of 
each region.

- 120 - 
• Each of the seven sugar producing regions (Far North Queensland, Herbert, 
Burdekin, Mackay, Bundaberg, South Queensland and New South Wales) is 
represented by an RAG. The Ord River region in Western Australia reports 
Forestry. 
producing regions in Queensland, to work with local stakeholders on industry reform 
activities. SEOs provide an important support role for the RAGs.  
The components of the Sugar Industry Reform Programme 2004 are: 
Sustainability Grant 
Recognising the industry’s immediate difficulties and to sustain it through a transition 
Sustainability Grant of up to $A146 million. This will be divided between operating 
mills and their growers, according to industry payment arrangements. 
The Sustainability Grant was provided in two instalments – the first tranche of 
$A73.05 million was paid in June 2004 after the Statement of Intent was signed. The 
second tranche of $A73.05 million was paid in September 2005 upon the 
the development of regional plans.  
Income Support 
payments to eligible growers and harvesters from 2 March 2004 to 1 March 2005, to 
help farming families most in need. Payments were made fortnightly, and were 
equivalent to the applicable rate of Newstart Allowance. They were subject to income 
and assets tests similar to those for the Newstart Allowance (farm assets are excluded 
from the assets test). Cane growers and cane harvesters in Queensland, 
New South Wales and Western Australia were eligible to apply. 
All eligible customers were required to undertake business planning activities within 
six months of being granted Income Support. Up to $A21 million (including 
Centrelink administration) was allocated for Income Support. 
Crisis Counselling 
many farmers and their families. The Government provided additional funding 
through the Department of Family and Community Services of up to $A5 million 
over four years for crisis counselling services for families in the industry. This is to 
increase the capacity of existing financial counselling and family support services in 
sugar growing regions, such as Cairns, Townsville, Mackay and Bundaberg, to 
respond flexibly to client needs in local communities. 
The services are delivered through the established Commonwealth Financial 
Counselling and Family Relationships Services programs. The programs’ officers 
have substantial experience and expertise in providing financial counselling or family 
support services. More than 9 000 people from the sugar industry are able access to 
these valuable financial counselling and family support services.

- 121 - 
Business Planning (growers and harvesters) 
administration) in funding to help growers and harvesters undertake Business 
Planning. 
Growers and harvesters receiving income support are provided with assistance of up 
to $A2 500 in value to develop business plans, to ensure they fully assess their 
situation and can better position their operation for the future or consider alternatives 
outside the industry. The funding enables them to obtain advice from accredited 
professionals on improving their sugar operation’s financial position or help them 
move to some form of alternative operation. They also receive assistance to develop 
and implement an activity plan to improve future enterprise viability. 
Growers and harvesters not receiving income support are eligible to obtain advice to 
the value of $A1 500 to help them fully assess their situation and options for the 
future. The funding enables them to analyse their business situation, identify and 
implement appropriate strategies to improve their sugar operation’s financial position, 
or consider alternatives. 
Business Planning (Mills) 
and smaller single site mill businesses to obtain advice from accredited professional 
advisers on their financial viability and develop comprehensive business plans. 
Eligible mills received up to $A100 000 for a business situation analysis and to 
identify an appropriate strategy to improve their financial position. This enabled mills 
facing financial difficulties to better manage the change process. It will also help mills 
prepare for the new operating environment following regulatory changes in 
Queensland. 
Eight Mills took up this assistance. 
This element was originally to cease on 30 June 2005 but was extended to  
31 December 2005. 
Grower Restructuring Grants 
administration) for Grower Restructuring Grants at the individual farm level for 
growers who choose to remain in the industry. The grants are available to sugar farm 
enterprises to undertake significant operational restructuring within the industry. They 
are paid in two instalments over two years for a range of activities, including: 
• 
improving farm management practices; 
• 
enhancing productivity and reducing cost of production; 
• 
engaging in alternative business structures; and 
• 
assisting in diversifying the enterprise base. 
Grants are paid at a rate of $A75 per hectare under cane (capped at $A15 000 or  
$A7 500 an instalment). First-year payments were available until 30 June 2005 and 
second-year payments are available until 30 June 2006.

- 122 - 
For the first instalment, growers were required to indicate, from a ‘menu’ of 
restructuring activities, the activities they intended to undertake. Growers are then 
required to demonstrate their use of funds in the first year to qualify for a payment in 
the second year. 
Before accessing restructuring grants, growers are required to undertake Business 
Planning to develop an activity plan and identify appropriate strategies to maximise 
the anticipated benefits from the grant. 
Regional and Community Projects 
Regional and Community Projects discretionary granting program, to assist medium 
and longer-term restructuring of the sugar industry. This will help provide regionally 
based, targeted projects to facilitate needed change. 
Projects are determined on a competitive basis and need to be consistent with agreed 
reform priorities. They will be developed to: 
• 
promote cross-sectoral partnerships and adoption of whole-of-system solutions; 
• 
enhance revenue and cost efficiency; and 
• 
facilitate environmental and social sustainability across the industry chain. 
Funding is available for projects to pursue options for diversification and alternative 
uses for cane, such as ethanol and biofuels, co-generation and bio-plastics. Regional 
and Community Projects also supports initiatives that help regional communities 
adjust to changed circumstances through economic diversification, attracting new 
businesses and expanding social infrastructure. 
Overall, projects are to complement the implementation of reform priorities identified 
by the IOG and RAGs and these groups each play a role in providing advice on 
project proposals to the Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry. The process 
undertaken by the RAGs and the IOG is designed to provide a filtering method for 
project proposals to ensure that the Minister considers those project proposals of the 
greatest regional significance, highest priority and endorsed by industry.  
Intergenerational Transfer 
Many industry stakeholders have emphasised a need to ensure farms can more readily 
introduced a sugar industry Intergenerational Transfer scheme through a three-year 
‘holiday window’ from normal gifting provisions that apply to the age pension. Up to 
$A23 million (including administration) is available over four years. 
This scheme provides sugarcane growers who satisfy certain criteria with a window of 
opportunity to gift their farm without attracting the disposal (gifting) of assets rules 
that apply to income support payments paid by Centrelink and the Department of 
Veterans’ Affairs. 
To be eligible for this assistance, the net value of the farm must be no more than  
$A500 000. The transfer must be a gift and divest the farmer of all legal interest (the 
home is an exception). The income test is equivalent to that for the aged pension for 
singles and couples. The next generation must have had an active involvement in the

- 123 - 
farm for three years before transfer, and retiring farmers must have owned the 
property for at least 15 years or been actively involved in farming for 20 years. 
Farmers accessing the Intergenerational Transfer scheme are not eligible to receive a 
Re-establishment Grant. 
The Departments of Family and Community Services and Veteran’s Affairs have 
legislative responsibility for this scheme which is governed by the Social Security Act 
1991 and the Veterans’ Entitlements Act 1986. 
Re-establishment Grants 
growers and harvesters who wish to leave the industry. 
Originally, one-off grants were available for growers for three years on a sliding 
scale: 
• 
up to $A100 000 until 30 June 2005; 
• 
up to $A75 000 from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006; 
• 
up to $A50 000 from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007. 
After review this has been changed to allow the $A100 000 to be accessed until  
30 June 2006 after which the grant will reduce to $50 000 as originally intended. In 
addition, some of the eligibility criteria have changed.  
• Growers and harvesters are now able to off-set their various assets within one 
over-arching limit. For example, partnered home owners can now access to 
maximum grant if their combined net assets are less than $A445 000. Previously, 
the value of the family home, after exit, was considered under a separate category 
to the value of all other assets.  
• Cane farmers who narrowly failed to meet the asset limits now also qualify for a 
reduced grant. In these cases, the value of the Re-establishment Grant is reduced 
by $A2 for every $A3 in assets above the relevant asset limit. 
One-off grants of up to $A50 000 for sole harvesters are also available for three years 
from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2007. 
Under this assistance, growers are asked to choose whether they wish to leave the 
sugar industry for at least five years, perhaps to diversify into other crops, or sell their 
properties and leave agriculture altogether. 
Re-establishment grants will be paid once the farm property has been sold or retired 
from cane production, or the farmer has ceased to be involved in the sugar enterprise. 
Customers must also have disposed of their sugar terminal and mill shares. 
Customers do not have to qualify for Income Support to gain access to the Re-
establishment Grant. Up to $A96 million (including Centrelink administration) over 
three years has been allocated for Re-establishment Grants. 
Retraining 
displace some industry participants, such as growers, mill workers and other industry 
employees. Accordingly, the Government has provided up to $A7 million, including

- 124 - 
administration for retraining support for harvesters and mill workers made redundant 
through the reforms, as well as for growers who leave the industry. 
The assistance is delivered through programs administered by the Departments of 
Employment and Workplace Relations, and Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry. 
Existing programs in sugar regions will receive extra funding over three years.

- 125 - 
APPENDIX E 
Potential Diversification Opportunities for the Sugar Industry 
Additional information about potential diversification opportunities for the sugar 
industry. 
Cogeneration of Electricity 
Electricity cogeneration is a form of renewable energy supply through the 
simultaneous production of heat and electricity for internal process use and external 
sale using a renewable fuel which in the sugar industry’s case is bagasse (sugarcane 
fibre residue). Bagasse is combusted in a boiler to produce steam which is passed 
through a steam turbine/generator set that produces electricity. Some low pressure 
steam from the turbine is used for process heating in the production of raw sugar. 
Cogeneration for on-site energy use, as opposed to external sale, is well established in 
Australia’s sugar industry.  
The Renewable Energy (Electricity) Act 2000, created a Mandatory Renewable 
Energy Target (MRET) of 9 500 Gigawatt hours (GWh) of renewable energy 
generation per year by 2010. This Act also created Renewable Energy Certificates 
(RECs) which are a new form of “currency”, used to demonstrate compliance with the 
requirements of the Government’s MRET and can be traded. It appears in early 2006 
that enough RECs have been generated to meet the MRET target. 
Additional cogeneration of electricity could provide a useful contribution to the 
income stream of raw sugar mills through:  
• Sale of surplus electricity (by installing capacity excess to mill requirements) into 
the distribution grid; and  
• the added value created through RECs – although the market for RECs appears to 
be fully satisfied. 
The bulk of the industry operates steam and electricity generating plant that is 
essentially designed to make the sugar mill self sufficient for its energy needs while 
also eliminating any potential problem with the disposal of excess bagasse. To 
become efficient producers of cogenerated electricity the installed facilities within 
many mills need to be upgraded with more efficient steam generating units, 
condensing turbine electricity generating sets and more efficient processing plant. The 
capital cost associated with this can be high and impacts the economic viability of 
cogeneration of electricity. 
The sugar industry contends that the current MRET scheme while supportive of 
bagasse based cogeneration schemes, does not provide sufficient incentive for larger 
scale developments to proceed, unless they are on the back of a factory expansion or a 
necessary upgrade of boiler plant. 
Another factor affecting the economic viability of electricity cogeneration for the 
sugar industry is that bagasse is generated for only 5 to 6 months of the year. Further 
examination of the industry’s capability to supply electricity on a year round basis 
with flexibility to increase and decrease the supply of electricity in line with the

- 126 - 
demands of the electricity market is needed. The level of generation required to 
compete efficiently with existing and proposed power stations may be considerably 
larger than the plants currently under consideration by the sugar industry. 
As relatively small suppliers within the electricity market, sugar mills have been price 
takers as opposed to price makers in this industry. In the medium term sugar mills will 
continue to be price takers in the electricity market unless the mills invest capital and 
restructure operations to become large and active participants in the electricity market. 
The simple economics of supplying electricity cost effectively to compete with large 
coal-fired generators would seem to dictate that sugar mills need to have the 
capability to produce electricity on a year round basis.  
To be a significant diversification option cogeneration of electricity requires a 
statutory market.

- 127 - 
Stockfeed from Sugarcane 
At present a number of Australian companies are exploring opportunities to 
manufacture and market stockfeed from sugarcane “waste” products including cane 
tops. Some whole of sugarcane products are also being trialled. 
The stockfeed market is extremely competitive domestically and internationally.  
Japan imports around 2.4 million tonnes of stockfeed annually. Australia supplies  
25 per cent of this market in competition with the USA and Canada. 
The Australian stockfeed and lot feed industries suggest that export is the only volume 
market available for stockfeed based on sugarcane or bagasse. Australia’s market 
appears to be fully serviced as adequate supplies of grain and hay are available for the 
most part except in periods of extreme drought. Extensive research over a number of 
years has been conducted to develop specific rations for grain and hay stockfeeds for 
different types of cattle and different markets. It does not yet appear that this level of 
specificity has been developed for sugarcane based feeds.  
Various claims have been made about the markets for sugarcane based stockfeed in 
Japan and Korea but the volume, quality and price sensitivity of these markets are not 
fully known or tested.  
The 1999 stockfeed feasibility study commissioned by Fibretek, (now known as Cane 
Fibre Products) concluded that: 
• stockfeed production is a low margin, capital intensive commodity business; 
• Australian stockfeed operations have had limited profitability, with a low and 
declining earnings before interest and tax which may have been affected by 
drought; 
• in 1999, the Queensland market was essentially a duopoly, between Ridley and 
Riverina; 
• any new entrant would need; 
o an anchor client to provide base volume;  
o capacity to deliver a full range of total mixed rations and supplements; and 
o diversification across segments to overcome industry cycles; 
• the stockfeed market in Japan was mature with well developed customer 
relationships. Any new product would need a special edge. There is a volume 
supply of sugarcane and sugar beet fibre available from China.

- 128 - 
Fuel Ethanol 
biodiesel produced in Australia from renewable sources will contribute at least 
350 million litres (Ml) to the total fuel supply by 2010, up from the existing 40 Ml 
capacity. Progress towards this objective will be reviewed in 2006. 
fuel products to reach its target. Rather, it is aiming to achieve the target through the 
Biofuels Capital Grants Programme, excise and other assistance arrangements. 
Australia’s main ethanol producers are CSR, Manildra and Bundaberg Distilling 
Company (supplies mainly potable alcohol). In 2004 proposed new entrants for grain 
based ethanol production included Lemon Tree Pty Ltd, Millmerran QLD and 
Primary Energy Ltd, Gunnedah New South Wales. In November 2005, the Dalby Bio-
Refinery Ltd announced it will commence Stage One construction of an ethanol plant, 
worth $A54 million, near Dalby QLD during the first half of 2006.  
Two major studies carried out by CSIRO/ABARE have examined the economic 
viability of the Australian biofuels industry. ABARE concluded that the production of 
ethanol from sorghum or molasses is viable in the long term under the current excise 
arrangements. 
On 22 September 2005, the Prime Minister released a Report by the Taskforce on 
Biofuels commissioned in May 2005. The Prime Minister reaffirmed the 
work closely with the biofuels industry to develop Industry Action Plans to underpin 
the achievement of the target. 
Excise Arrangements 
The excise duty is set at 50 per cent of ethanol’s energy content (12.5 cents per litre). 
The current excise arrangements for ethanol are: 
• excise duty on domestically produced ethanol is rebatable; and 
• the rebate of excise duty will decease from 1 July 2011, with the rebate to be 
completely phased out from 1 July 2015.  
Ethanol Labelling 
mandatory labelling of ethanol blends under the Fuel Quality Standards Act 2000 (the 
Act). The Minister for the Environment and Heritage made a determination under the 
Act which specifies the labelling requirements for the sale of ethanol-petrol blends in 
Australia. The Information Standard commenced on 1 March 2004. 
10 per cent Ethanol Content 
maximum 10 per cent limit of ethanol blends in petrol. This took effect from 
1 July 2003. The Queensland Government has encouraged, where possible, the use of 
ethanol fuel blend of 10 per cent (E10) across the Queensland Government fleet. BP 
commenced marketing E10 ethanol blend fuel in south-east Queensland in 2002.

- 129 - 
Furfural 
Furfural is an industrial chemical derived from a variety of agricultural by-products, 
including corncobs, cereal bran, sawdust and bagasse. Its main application is as an 
input used for the manufacture of resins in the foundry industry, as a solvent in the 
refining of lubricating oils, in the manufacture of certain plastics and other 
intermediates including pharmaceutical and veterinary drug production and dye 
production. There is potential for furfural to be substituted for a number of chemicals 
used as timber treatments and nematicides.  
During the early 1990s, world production of furfural reportedly shifted from 
developed countries to developing countries. Western European production 
significantly reduced while at the same time production in China increased. The 
United States, Europe (excluding Russia) and Japan are all net importers of furfural. 
Furfural manufacturing is understood to be increasing in a number of countries. China 
and the Dominican Republic are understood to manufacture a significant quantity of 
furfural. China has several production facilities which in total are understood to 
manufacture the largest volume of furfural in the world. The Dominican Republic’s 
Central Romana Corporation is reported to manufacture the second largest volume of 
furfural.  
China’s producers are understood to rely primarily on corncobs for input materials. It 
is understood the Dominican Republic’s and South Africa’s furfural production is 
based upon bagasse as the feed stock. 
A new process developed in South Africa (SupraYield®) is claimed to improve on 
existing production methods with higher yields, less inputs and improved 
environmental outcomes.

- 130 - 
Biotechnologically Modified Sugarcane 
The Australian sugar industry recognises that strong negative consumer perceptions 
about biotechnologically modified (BM) sugarcane could prevent its successful 
commercialisation. 
One of the main causes for public concern about biotechnological engineering is the 
lack of knowledge about the process. Consumers appear wary of these “new” products 
and without widespread consumer acceptance the commercial development of BM 
sugarcanes would not appear possible in the near term. 
Nonetheless, the successful development of biotechnologically modified sugarcane 
could play a role in improving the productivity in Australia’s sugar industry. BM 
sugarcane is considered the easiest and most cost-effective way of creating multi-fold 
increase in productivity.  
A significant amount of work has already been undertaken through the use of 
biotechnology to develop applications to sugarcane plant improvement. Such 
applications to plant improvement may enable the sugarcane plant to store high levels 
of sucrose or to produce and store new products for wider markets than sugar and may 
include: 
• higher production levels, (through higher sucrose content and longer harvest 
seasons); 
• reduced environmental impact through varieties that use water and nitrogen more 
efficiently; 
• reduced dependence on applied chemicals to control pest and diseases; and 
• potential for the creation of biodegradable end products (such as bio-plastics and 
pharmaceuticals). 
Various trials being undertaken include higher yields, delayed flowering, resistance to 
pests (such as borers) and mosaic disease.  
The Cooperative Research Centre for Sugar Industry Innovation through 
Biotechnology (SIIB), established in 2003, aims to promote the use of sugarcane as a 
renewable bio-factory and, thereby, provide a sustainable, competitive advantage for a 
value added sugarcane industry.  
As part of its alliance with the SIIB, the University of Queensland has been permitted 
to release, under limited and controlled conditions, a BM sugarcane expressing the 
enzyme – sucrose isomerase. The university will trial up to 120 BM sugarcane lines at 
two sites in the Burdekin Shire in Queensland between February 2005 
and December 2010. The main aim of the proposed trial is to determine the agronomic 
performance of the BM sugarcane lines under Australian field conditions. The results 
of these preliminary trials will be used to further improve effectiveness of the gene 
constructs for future development.  
Brazil is also investigating BM sugarcane (April 2005). Brazil's Centre for Sugar 
Technology (CST), a research lab, has begun field trials of herbicide-resistant BM 
sugarcane.

- 131 - 
APPENDIX F  
Additional Information about Issues in the Sugar Industry 
Off-farm Income 
As the industry operates in early 2006 the sugarcane grower and the miller are both 
exposed to volatility in the freely traded world market for raw sugar. This exposure to 
price volatility by the mills and growers affects the value chain. The restricted 
capacity of sugarcane growers and the millers to manage finances due to price 
uncertainty is compounded by the inherent seasonal variability in production. In 
contrast, service providers to the industry are operating in an environment in which 
their input and output prices are influenced by the domestic market and are relatively 
inflexible. A number of participants in the sugarcane growing sector of the industry 
appear to have attempted to overcome the volatility in income from the world price of 
raw sugar through off-farm income.  
Off-farm income may be obtained by personal exertion or from non-farming 
investments. The point of difference between these income sources is the proportion 
of time the grower works on the property. A grower who chooses to obtain off-farm 
income through personal exertion will usually have to be absent from the property for 
a period of time to obtain the income. A grower who supplements income through 
investments usually remains on the property, however the capital invested to earn the 
income is off the property and may not be of direct benefit to the industry. 
The tourism and mining industries have developed adjacent to or near many 
sugarcane producing regions. This appears to be bringing an increasing number of 
relatively affluent people into the coastal region stimulating economic development. 
A side effect of this is the growth in demand for smaller properties for lifestyle 
reasons78. 
The impact of coal mining within the Bowen basin is apparent in the Mackay region, 
although it has affected the industry throughout North Queensland. The development 
of tourism, mining and services sectors in proximity to sugarcane regions provide an 
opportunity for sugarcane growers to generate off-farm income through personal 
exertion to supplement sugarcane income.  
The opportunity to supplement off-farm income from these sectors has a knock on 
effect by drawing upon the supply of labour to the sugarcane industry. The present 
resources boom has provided the mining industry with the potential to attract 
employees to the sector through the ability to pay higher wages. This has drawn the 
labour pool away from the sugar industry. 
The ability to attract both skilled technicians and less skilled labour towards 
employment in the sugar industry is compromised by the seasonal nature of sugar 
milling in comparison to permanent employment in another industry. Anecdotal 
reports indicate the industry is facing real difficulty in retaining employees with 
electrical trade qualifications. 
78 This issue is influencing the demand for land in some sugarcane regions.

- 132 - 
The second effect of the development of off-farm employment and investment within 
sugarcane regions has led to the phenomenon of the non-sugarcane dependent grower. 
The non-sugarcane dependent grower has emerged because of the uncertainty of 
income generated from sugarcane production. This uncertainty may be associated 
with the number of family members attempting to share income from a sugarcane 
farm.  
The supplementary income provided by off-farm investment and/or employment in 
the mining, tourism and services sectors may provide sugarcane growers with an 
effective hedge against variable sugarcane income. The earnings provided from off-
farm income are effectively a transfer of revenue from these sectors to the variably 
priced sugarcane sector within a region. The relatively stable income generated by the 
non-sugarcane dependent grower with off-farm income may provide the smaller 
producer with the opportunity to secure finance to develop the property and capture 
the benefits of scale. In this case the part time sugarcane grower may increase 
aggregate production within the region or mill area.  
Alternatively the non-sugarcane dependent grower may choose to transfer the income 
generated from off-farm employment into another investment. This may be facilitated 
by taxation treatment that applies to primary production. This grower may not choose 
to make investments in the sugarcane growing property.  
It is hypothetically possible for a land holder in the agriculture sector to generate 
transfer payments within the tax system which would not be available if the land 
holder were to leave the agricultural sector. Although the size of these transfer 
payments may provide a marginal benefit to the individual it may be a factor 
contributing to the high proportion of small scale sugarcane enterprises in the 
industry.

- 133 - 
Contestable Resource Allocation – Land Use 
Both the sugarcane dependent and non-sugarcane dependent sugarcane producer are 
generating capital gain through land banking. The rate of capital gain varies between 
and within regions. Land banking by investors for future development has a latent 
effect on sugarcane production. Investors retaining land in anticipation of future 
development opportunity appear to be a factor inhibiting the development of large 
scale sugarcane enterprises. The land will ultimately be withdrawn from sugarcane 
production and will have an impact upon the sugarcane available for optimal mill 
supply.  
A decrease in the amount of sugarcane production as land is diverted to another 
economic activity has three main impacts upon a region or mill area. The first is the 
decrease in the total volume of sugarcane available. The second is to dilute the 
volume of sugarcane across the region or mill area which may impose costs on the 
transport of sugarcane to a mill. Thirdly, optimal mill throughput is affected, which 
may lead to mill closure. 
The ad hoc substitution of plantations of perennial crops or subdivision for urban and 
peri-urban development for sugarcane land has been evident in the industry for some 
time.  
Land traditionally allocated to sugarcane production is under challenge as the net 
margin from sugarcane production competes with the net margin that may be 
generated from other crops. Within regions the diversion of sugarcane for alternative 
crops has happened to a greater or lesser extent depending on the natural resources of 
the region and proximity to markets for products. A sugar mill in itself only provides 
another land use option to an agricultural investor. 
The benefits from rotations in cropping systems are widely accepted and apply to the 
inclusion of rotational crops in the sugarcane production system. In many areas the 
industry appears to be adopting rotational cropping for agronomic purposes to 
supplement sugarcane production. However, as skills in producing various crops 
develop sugarcane production may decline as growers divert resources to the most 
profitable activity.  
Within a region or mill area there are two conditions that must be met before land 
traditionally allocated to sugarcane is diverted to another crop. The first condition is 
the provision of infrastructure to support a new industry. For example, without the 
provision of storage and handling facilities for alternative crops it is difficult to 
encourage the production of these crops. The second condition is the availability of 
traders to transact alternative crops. Generally when condition one and two are both 
met the dominance of sugarcane as the primary agricultural activity within a region 
begins to decrease. Nevertheless, the market for the alternative crop or activity usually 
needs a threshold scale of production at the farm and/or regional level for the activity 
to be viable.

- 134 - 
Transport in the Value Chain 
There is an optimal period between the time sugarcane is cut at harvest and the time at 
which sugarcane is processed at a mill. It is believed that there is an optimum period 
of about 16 hours available for transport of cut sugarcane before the product may 
begin to deteriorate significantly. This 16 hour period between harvesting and 
processing could hypothetically allow sugarcane to be transported a very long 
distance using modern transport systems. This implies that a sugar mill located in 
Mackay could road transport sugarcane harvested north of Mossman for processing 
before the sugarcane would begin to significantly deteriorate.  
However, the economics of moving a bulky but low value product do not translate 
into sugarcane being transported close to these distances, and fifty kilometres or less 
may well be the limit. As an indicator of the capacity to meet the cost of sugarcane 
transport it is worth considering the value of a truck load of sugarcane. At a raw sugar 
pool price equivalent of $A250 per tonne the approximate value of a semi-trailer load 
of sugarcane may be $A400. If the raw sugar pool price equivalent increases to $A300 
per tonne the value of the same load of sugarcane increases to approximately $A480. 
In comparison, the approximate value of a semi-trailer load of raw sugar may be 
approximately $A6 250 at a raw sugar pool price equivalent of $A250 per tonne and 
approximately $A7 500 at a raw sugar pool price equivalent of $A300 per tonne. 
Regardless of a road or light rail transport system sugarcane may only be cost 
effectively transported over relatively short distances. 
Most of Queensland’s sugar industry has developed a narrow gauge rail transport 
system that imposes upon the milling sector a capital demand to operate and maintain. 
The networks are a consequence of the industry’s history and were usually established 
as part of the mill infrastructure. Accordingly the rail networks were built to 
accommodate the needs of the industry because they were cost effective and practical 
in comparison with road transport infrastructure at the time of construction. As road 
transport infrastructure has improved since cane railways were constructed road 
transport is now an alternative. However, the transfer of sugarcane from narrow gauge 
rail to road appears to be a highly emotive community issue within sugar regions and 
has therefore attracted local and state government intervention through regulation. 
The Bundaberg region provides an example of local community concern with transfer 
of sugarcane to the road.  
As cut sugarcane occupies a high volume with a low weight a prime mover with one 
attached semi-trailer can legally carry approximately 16 tonnes of sugarcane to remain 
within the height and length limits applying to this vehicle. By comparison, in raw 
sugar configuration this vehicle would not approach the height or length limits but 
would be limited by the gross mass that the vehicle may carry. The same vehicle may 
be configured to legally transport approximately 25 tonnes of raw sugar, increasing 
the gross mass of the vehicle by approximately 9 tonnes above the gross mass when 
transporting cut sugarcane. Accordingly, semi-trailer vehicles transporting cut 
sugarcane appear to be very large vehicles, but are in fact relatively lightly laden. As 
these vehicles are relatively lightly laden they have less capacity to damage road 
surfaces than the vehicles transporting raw sugar. This issue appears to be omitted 
from discussion about road transport of cut sugarcane.

- 135 - 
An important issue when comparing narrow gauge rail to road transport of sugarcane 
is that roads are a public good and cane railway is a private good. The public good has 
now duplicated private infrastructure. There appears to be a conflict between the 
community and the industry regarding the use of historical infrastructure of cane 
railways or the use of modern public road infrastructure and transport systems. This 
conflict is impeding an industry to determine its cost effective transport options.  
A cane railway is the lowest variable cost sugarcane transport system provided the 
network matches the distribution of sugarcane within a region or mill area. However, 
given the change in sugarcane distribution in regions the mills may have stranded 
capital in track, locomotives and wagons. To restructure the rail networks the mills 
needs significant capital.  
The current milling areas have generally committed capital to transporting and milling 
when the potential return from sugarcane was at its highest. This is exacerbated by the 
relatively short milling season in Queensland. The loss of sugarcane land to 
alternative uses, coupled with the volume required to economically operate a sugar 
milling business and the limit from which cane may be profitably transported have 
imposed a relatively high cost structure upon the milling sector.

- 136 - 
Research, Development and Extension Expenditure 
The aggregate level of research, development and extension expenditure within the 
Australian sugar industry is estimated to be in the range of three to five per cent of the 
gross value of raw sugar production. The existing service providers focus most 
resources upon activities relating to sugarcane growing and supply. However, the IOG 
has become aware that, despite the resources invested in developing all aspects of 
cane growing, sugar yields per tonne of cane and per hectare appear to have levelled 
off. This is particularly the case for the sugar content which has not improved on 
levels achieved in the 1930’s. 
The traditional research, development and extension providers are experiencing 
increasing difficulty in sourcing funding as the industry adopts a more commercial 
and less general levy based approach. An extreme example is the Sugar Research 
Institute, the Mackay based milling research organisation, which is undergoing a 
fundamental restructure with research activities relocating to within the Queensland 
University of Technology. 
With progressive deregulation, the remaining compulsory collection of funds for 
research and development via levies on production is conducted through the 
the Sugar Research and Development Corporation (SRDC). Accordingly, the SRDC’s 
research plan and activities must meet the requirements of the 
Act 1989 to receive industry endorsement. SRDC will work with its stakeholders to 
deliver the following outcomes: 
• 
An increasing and more reliable cane supply, primarily through the 
implementation of robust farming systems that enhance economic and 
environmental performance, and are less vulnerable to the impacts of adverse 
factors such as disease and climate variability; 
• 
Facilitation of change which promotes adoption of whole-of-system solutions to 
enhance revenue and cost efficiency across the value chain at mill area and 
regional levels; 
• 
Demonstration of environmental sustainability to the satisfaction of all 
stakeholders; 
• 
Diversification of the income stream from products derived from sugarcane; 
• 
Enhancement of human capacity and partnerships between industry, research and 
regional communities to underpin change, learning and innovation; and 
• 
An effective Research and Development capability underpinning industry futures. 
SRDC funding for the year ending 30 June 2005 included $A4.8 million from the 
millers. 
The Bureau of Sugar Experiment Stations (BSES) was established in Queensland in 
1900 to provide research, development and extension services to the industry overall. 
In more recent decades, the BSES involvement in milling related research has largely 
ceased and the focus is on a sustainable sugarcane production system and reliable 
supply. The annual cash expenditure of the BSES is of the order of $A20 million and 
the organisation employs 160 staff. Industry contribution is in the form of a voluntary 
service fee per tonne from growers and millers and is currently of the order of

- 137 - 
$A7 million and projected to increase significantly in future years. The State of 
Queensland, through the Department of Primary Industries and Fisheries’ budget has 
traditionally provided financial support to the BSES and this support has been subject 
to formal review in late 2005 as the BSES is now an independent corporate entity.  
In addition the CSIRO, Universities, Co-operative Research Centres, regional 
Productivity Boards and commercial enterprises provide research, development and 
extension services to the industry.

- 138 -

- 139 - 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The Industry Oversight Group wishes to acknowledge the assistance and contribution 
provided by: 
• past and present members of the Regional Advisory Groups (RAGs), lead by the 
Chairs  
– Bill Stainlay, New South Wales RAG 
– Tony Nioa, South RAG (Former) 
– David Braddock, South RAG  
– John Bell, Bundaberg RAG 
– Greg Sutherland, Mackay RAG 
– Sherry Kaurila, Herbert RAG (Former) 
– Russ McNee, Burdekin RAG 
– Robert Blanckensee, Far North Queensland RAG. 
• Sugar Executive Officers 
• Queensland Sugar Limited 
• PricewaterhouseCoopers 
• financial institutions, Australian and international.

- 140 -

- 141 - 
GLOSSARY  
ABARE 
Australian Bureau of Agriculture and Resource Economics  
ACP 
African, Caribbean and Pacific 
ACFA 
Australian Cane Farmers Association 
ASEAN 
Association of South East Asian Nations 
ASMC 
Australian Sugar Milling Council  
AUD 
Australian Dollar 
BM 
biotechnologically modified 
BRL 
Brazilian Real 
BSES 
Bureau of Sugar Experiment Stations (now BSES Ltd) 
CANEGROWERS Registered business name of the Queensland Cane Growers 
Organisation Ltd 
CNA 
National Confederation of Agriculture – Brazil  
CCS 
commercial cane sugar content of cane 
Compass 
BSES program COMbining Profitability And Sustainability in 
Sugar 
CPA 
Cane Production Area  
CPPB 
Cane Protection and Productivity Board 
CRC 
Cooperative Research Centre 
CSIRO 
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation 
CST 
Centre for Sugar Technology – Brazil  
E10 
fuel containing 10 per cent Ethanol 
EBA 
Everything But Arms initiative of the European Union 
EBIT 
earnings before interest and tax 
EBITDA 
earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortisation 
EU 
European Union 
FTA 
free trade agreement 
GDP 
Gross Domestic Product 
Global Sugar 
Alliance 
Global Alliance for Sugar Trade Reform and Liberalisation 
GVP 
Gross Value of Production 
GWh 
gigawatt hours 
HFCS 
high-fructose corn syrup 
Hildebrand 
Report 
Report of the independent assessment of the sugar industry 
conducted by Clive Hildebrand in 2002 
IAC 
Industries Assistance Commission 
IBGE 
Institute of Geography and Statistics – Brazil  
IEA 
Agricultural Economics Institute of the State of São Paulo 
Secretariat of Agriculture 
IGG 
Industry Guidance Group 
IOG 
Industry Oversight Group 
ISO 
International Sugar Organisation 
KPI 
key performance indicator 
LAC 
long-run average cost 
LDC 
least-developed country 
MAPA 
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Supply – Brazil  
Ml 
million litres 
MRET 
Mandatory Renewable Energy Target 
MWh 
megawatt hours

- 142 - 
NIR 
near-infrared spectroscopy 
NSWSMC 
New South Wales Sugar Milling Cooperative Ltd 
NY11 
New York Board of Trade Raw Sugar Futures Contract Number 11 
OECD 
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development 
QDPI&F 
Queensland Department of Primary Industries and Fisheries 
QSL 
Queensland Sugar Limited 
RAG 
Regional Advisory Group 
REC 
Renewable Energy Certificate 
R&D 
research and development 
RD&E 
research, development and extension 
ROI 
return on invested capital 
RCP 
Regional and Community Projects, component of the SIRP 2004 
SEO 
Sugar Executive Officer, RAG Secretariat 
SIIB 
Cooperative Research Centre for Sugar Industry Innovation through 
Biotechnology 
SIRP 2004 
Sugar Industry Reform Programme 2004 
SIRWP 
Sugar Industry Review Working Party 
SRDC 
Sugar Research and Development Corporation 
SRI 
Sugar Research Institute 
STL 
Sugar Terminals Ltd 
tc 
tonnes of cane  
t/ha 
tonnes per hectare 
UNICA 
São Paulo Sugarcane Agroindustry Union 
US 
United States 
USD 
United States Dollar  
WTO 
World Trade Organisation

- 143 - 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Adams, J., Fereday, N., Forber, G., Jackson, D., Midgeley, C., Powell, N. and 
Tood, M. (2005), ‘Are energy prices influencing sugar prices?’, LMC International 
Limited, Sweetener Analysis, October 
Austrade (2001), Investing in Latin American growth – unlocking opportunities in 
Affairs and Trade, Economic Analytical Unit  
Australian Bureau of Agriculture and Resource Economics (ABARE) (2004), 
Australian commodity statistics 2004, Commonwealth of Australia 
ABARE (2005), Australian commodities, vol 12, no. 3, Commonwealth of Australia  
of Australia 
Banks, G. (2005), Structural reform Australian style: lessons for others?, Presentation 
delivered to the International Monetary Fund and World Bank (United States, 26–
27 May) and Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (France, 
31 May) 
Biofuels Taskforce (2005), Final report, report to the Prime Minister 
the Hon. John Howard MP, Commonwealth of Australia 
Bolling, C. and Suarez, N.R. (2001), ‘The Brazilian sugar industry: recent 
developments’, Market and Trade Economics Division, Economic Research Service, 
September, SSS-232 
Borell, B. (1991), How a change in Brazil’s sugar policies would affect the world 
sugar market, World Bank policy, research and external affairs working paper, April, 
WPS 642 
Borell, B., Bianco, J.R. and Bale, M.D. (1994), Brazil’s sugarcane sector – a case of 
lost opportunity, World Bank policy, research and external affairs policy research 
working paper, October, WPS 1363 
Czarnikow Sugar Review (2005), 14 December 2005, report no. 1983 e 72 
Department of Primary Industries and Fisheries (2005), Prospects for Queensland’s 
primary industries, Queensland Government 
European Commission (2005), The European sugar sector: its importance and its 
future, European Commission, June  
FO Licht (2005), International sugar and sweetener report, 15 November, vol 137, 
no 34

- 144 - 
Gudoshnikov, S., Jolly, L. and Spence, D. (2004), The world sugar market, 
International Sugar Organisation  
Hildebrand, C. (2002a), ‘Hildebrand presents the reports of the Australian sugar 
industry assessment to the Federal Government’, Media release, 28 June. 
Hildebrand, C. (2002b), Independent assessment of the sugar industry, report to 
the Hon. Warren Truss MP, Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry 
Industry Commission (1992), The Australian sugar industry, report no. 19, 
Commonwealth of Australia 
Isaias de Carvalho Macedo (ed) (2005), Sugarcane’s energy – twelve studies on 
Brazilian sugarcane agribusiness and its suitability, São Paulo Sugar Cane 
Agroindustry Union 
Larson, D.F. and Borrell, B. (2001), Sugar policy and reform, World Bank policy, 
research and external affairs policy research working paper, May, WPS 2602 
LMC International (2004), Sweetener analysis, March  
LMC International (2005a), Sweetener analysis, October 2005 
LMC International (2005b), Sugar and sweeteners quarterly, fourth quarter, 
November 
LMC International (2006), Sugar and sweeteners quarterly, first quarter, February  
Milford, B. (2005), ‘Cane farm sales prices recover’, Australian canegrower, 
28 November, vol 27, no. 24 
Mitchell, D. (2005), Sugar policies and opportunity for change, World Bank global 
agricultural trade and developing countries policy research working paper, February, 
WPS 3222   
Newton, R. (1897), Work and wealth of Queensland   
Oanda.com: the currency site (2006), FX history: historical currency exchange rates, 
www.oanda.com/converter/fxhistory 
Office of Regulation Review (1998), A Guide to regulation (second edition), 
Commonwealth of Australia 
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) (2005a), Tackling 
trade in agriculture, OECD policy brief, November  
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) (2005b), OECD 
Review of agricultural policies – Brazil, OECD 
Queensland Sugar Limited (2005), Raw sugar market prospects, July

- 145 - 
Sugar Industry Review Working Party (1996), Sugar winning globally, report to 
the Hon. T.J. Perrett MLA, Minister for Primary Industries, and 
the Hon. John Anderson MP, Minister for Primary Industries and Energy, 
Commonwealth of Australia 
Sugar Terminals Limited (2005), Annual Report 2004–2005, Sugar Terminals Limited 
USDA Foreign Agricultural Service (2005), Brazil sugar: semi annual, Global 
Agriculture Information Network, 7 October, report no. BR5020  
World Bank (1994), Brazil: the management of agricultural, rural development and 
natural resources, report no. 11783-BR 
World Bank (2002), Brazil – growth and poverty reduction in Pernambuco: 
developing a sustainable policy framework, report no. 20754-BR