The National Registration Scheme
The National Registration Scheme for Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals (National Registration
Scheme) was established under Commonwealth and state and territory legislation and ensures that
these products are:
safe when exposed to humans and non-target species either through direct exposure or residues
in treated food stuffs
not a risk to the environment
effective on target species, and
labeled and packaged correctly.
The Department of Agriculture manages the legislation under which the National Registration Scheme
operates. This includes amending current legislation or introducing new Bills where Commonwealth,
state and territory governments have agreed there is a need. The Minister for Agriculture has overall
policy responsibility for agricultural and veterinary (agvet) chemicals and presents these changes to
Parliament.
The Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority (APVMA), formerly known as the
National Registration Authority for Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals (NRA), sits within the
Agriculture portfolio and is an independent statutory authority that administers the National
Registration Scheme.
The APVMA evaluates, registers and regulates agricultural and veterinary (agvet) chemicals up to the
point of sale. The states and territories are responsible for control of use.
Chemical companies wishing to register a product are required to provide extensive data supporting the
safe and environmentally friendly status of the product.
As part of the assessment process, the APVMA receives input from other Commonwealth agencies,
including:
Evaluations for completely new products can be lengthy and timeframes are prescribed in the
legislation. Evaluations of variations to available products can be shorter. The active constituent of a
product must be registered before or with registration of the product.
The Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals (Administration) Act 1992 established the National
Registration Scheme and amended the Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals Act 1988 to transfer the
powers and functions of the outgoing Australian Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals Council to the
then NRA, now known as the APVMA. 
The other major piece of legislation is the Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals Code Act 1994 (the
Code Act). The Code Act details the operational provisions for the registration of products and provides
the APVMA with its powers.
• 
• 
• 
•

The National Registration Scheme legislation includes six other Acts, two dealing with registration
activities and four relating to registration fees and charges. This legislation package repealed the
Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals Act 1988 and established a new framework for the operations of
the APVMA.
The department's interrelationship with the APVMA
The department's primary role is the governance and oversight of the National Registration Scheme,
administered by the APVMA.
The department has primary carriage of the overall direction of Commonwealth policy for the
management of agvet chemicals. It provides advice to the Minister on matters concerning the regulation
of agvet chemicals that are of interest and or concern to the Minister and the strategic aspects of
chemical management in Australia and its implications for agvet chemicals industries.
The agreement among the Commonwealth and the states and territories establishing the NRS requires
the department to consult with all parties to the agreement on changes to agvet chemicals legislation.
The department consults with the states and territories on any policy issues relating to the National
Registration Scheme. It consults with other Commonwealth departments and agencies on policy issues
as required.
At the international level, the APVMA participates in meetings regarding the assessment and
registration of agvet chemicals, in consultation with portfolio departments.
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/ag-farm-food/ag-vet-chemicals/regulation