Learn how to use the NEXDOC portal
To assist you in using the NEXDOC portal we have developed videos, user guides and fact sheets. Learn:
For further information or assistance, contact the NEXDOC help desk.
How to register in NEXDOC
You will only be able to use NEXDOC if your commodity has been introduced into the system.
To use NEXDOC, you will need to register as a user via the online service portal, even if you are using a third-party software to access the system.
How to lodge a Request to Export (REX) in the NEXDOC portal
To obtain your export certification through NEXDOC, you will need to lodge a REX. A REX contains information specific to your consignment, required by the department and the importing country. To find out the importing country requirements visit Micor.
Once the required details have been provided, you can submit the REX for lodgement.
What is involved in lodging a REX?
When lodging a REX you will need fill in information about the consignment, such as:
- product type
- packaging quantities and weight
- country
- freight type – air or sea
- container and seal numbers
- consignee details
- destination city and departure date
- manufacturing details
- endorsements.
Things to remember when lodging a REX
- You must be registered as an exporter in NEXDOC.
- Make sure you click, save, or add when entering details in each tab.
- Not all fields in the REX need to be populated. These are determined by importing country requirements.
Knowing what your REX status means
There are statuses linked to your REX to indicate the progress of your application, noting your REX may not go through all statuses. These are dependent on your commodity and importing country requirements.
Download
If you have difficulty accessing these files, contact us for help.
The REX statuses are:
- ORDER/DRAFT – this status indicates NEXDOC has the minimum information to generate a REX number, but there is not enough information to lodge the REX application. You can amend information at this stage.
- FINAL – the REX is lodged with the department for authorisation. In this stage your REX has not yet been authorised. No export permit has been granted yet, if required.
- CERTIFICATE READY – you can view a preview of your export certificate. This status occurs if you have selected the hold print indicator option. This option allows you to preview your final REX prior to releasing to print.
- IN REVIEW – your REX application contains information that needs to be reviewed by the department prior to obtaining your export certificate.
- COMPLETED – your REX application is complete and the final export certificate has been generated.
- CANCELLED - this status indicates that this REX has been cancelled and cannot be progressed from this stage.
- WITHDRAWN – you can withdraw your REX or your REX may be withdrawn by the system if it has not been updated at the order/draft status for 90 days.
How to print a certificate in your office
NEXDOC allows you to print your export certification to your own office, removing the need to collect your certificate from regional department offices. This function is only accessible if the importing country allows it.
When completing your REX, you will be asked to indicate your printing preferences for the certificate. To print from your office, you will need to indicate that you wish to ‘Use your own printer’ and then select one of the following print preference options of:
- hold - retains your certificate at the Certificate Ready status
- auto - generates and prints your certificate immediately to your selected printer once all reviews are complete.
The auto and hold preferences allow you to manage your printing options efficiently.
The video below outlines this process.
Download
If you have difficulty accessing these files, contact us for help.
For can read more on how to print your certificate in the related documents section.
How to amend or replace a REX
If you need to update information in your REX, a decision to amend or replace is based on the status of the REX.
You will need to amend your REX if your REX status is:
- order
- final
- in review
- certificate ready.
You will need to request a replacement if your REX status is:
- completed
- printed.
The video below displays if you should amend or replace your REX.
Download
If you have difficulty accessing these files, contact us for help.
How to copy a REX
If you are regularly exporting the same product, you can copy a previous REX application. There will be information that is required to complete the application such as quantities, weight, and departure date but a lot of the information will be copied over from the previous REX. The video below outlines how you can copy a previous REX.
Download
If you have difficulty accessing these files, contact us for help.
Need help?
For more information or assistance for NEXDOC, please contact NEXDOC@aff.gov.au
Related documents
Available for download below are user guides with information on NEXDOC, including how to lodge a REX.
Download
DAIRY - How to Lodge Request for Export (REX) for Dairy (PDF 1.3 MB)
DAIRY - How to Lodge Request for Export (REX) for Dairy (DOCX 1.6 MB)
If you have difficulty accessing these files, contact us for help.
Download
EGGS - How to Lodge Request for Export (REX) for Eggs (PDF 1.3 MB)
EGGS - How to Lodge Request for Export (REX) for Eggs (DOCX 1.6 MB)
If you have difficulty accessing these files, contact us for help.
Download
OTHER GOODS – NEXDOC FAQs (PDF 223 KB)
OTHER GOODS – NEXDOC FAQs (DOCX 224 KB)
OTHER GOODS - How to lodge a Request for Export (REX) for NX188B and NX188M (PDF 2.3 MB)
OTHER GOODS - How to lodge a Request for Export (REX) for NX188B and NX188M (DOCX 2.9 MB)
OTHER GOODS – How to lodge a Request for Export (REX) for NX418 (PDF 1.4 MB)
OTHER GOODS – How to lodge a Request for Export (REX) for NX418 (DOCX 1.7 MB)
Accessible versions of some of these documents are pending, in the interim please email NEXDOC@aff.gov.au for assistance.
Download
Fish - How to lodge a Request for Export (REX) for fish and fish products (PDF 1.3 MB)
Fish - How to lodge a Request for Export (REX) for fish and fish products (DOCX 1.4 MB)
If you have difficulty accessing these files, contact us for help.
Download
WOOL – How to lodge a Request for Export (REX) for Wool (PDF 1.3 MB) 
WOOL – How to lodge a Request for Export (REX) for Wool (DOCX 1.5 MB)
If you have difficulty accessing these files, contact us for help.
Download
SKINS AND HIDES – How to lodge a Request for Export (REX) for Skins and Hides (PDF 1.3 MB) 
SKINS AND HIDES – How to lodge a Request for Export (REX) for Skins and Hides (DOCX 1.6 MB)
If you have difficulty accessing these files, contact us for help.
Download
INEDIBLE MEAT – How to lodge a Request for Export (REX) for Inedible Meat (PDF 1.4 MB)
INEDIBLE MEAT – How to lodge a Request for Export (REX) for Inedible Meat (DOCX 1.5 MB)
If you have difficulty accessing these files, contact us for help.