Where biosecurity or imported food consignments are electronically declared as a Full Import Declaration (FID), Long Form Self Assessed Clearance (SCL), Carnets, Ship or Aircraft Stores and Transhipments, Unaccompanied Personal Effects (UPEs), or Australian Defence Force (ADF) Military consignments; clients must use the Cargo Online Lodgement System (COLS), to lodge import documentation for assessment.
Requirements for lodging import documentation via email
From 10 August 2026, email lodgement of import documentation for assessment will only be available in the circumstances as outlined below.
Documentation, including any additional information, related to CRS and SAC entries from non-paperless clients, are required to be emailed to sacncc@aff.gov.au
Email subject heading
To ensure appropriate prioritisation, please consider the following:
- For perishable or urgent consignments (e.g. live animals, airfreight perishables, non-refrigerated perishables and urgent medical supplies) include “Urgent” or “Perishable” in the subject line of the email.
- For animal transport equipment forms, include “Animal transport equipment” in the subject line of the email
Scanned images should be forwarded in PDF, JPG or TIF formats only and the total size of the email should not exceed 8MB. Zip files will not be accepted. To minimize file size, ensure that only the required documents are included in the email as follows:
- Email coversheet: identifying relevant import permit numbers; what documents have been attached; the expected outcome of the assessment; and the nominated location(s) for any required action.
- Commercial documents: bill of lading/air waybill; invoice or packing list
- Non–commodity documents (if required): packing declaration; treatment certificate
- Commodity documents* (if required): manufacturer’s/exporter’s declaration; treatment certificate; animal health or phytosanitary certificate; Departmental clearance letter
* Documentation requirements for specific commodities can be determined through the Biosecurity Import Conditions (BICON) system or the Import Permit if applicable.
Assessment of import documentation outside core business hours
Requests to have import documents assessed outside business hours must be made using the form below.
Note: Overtime charges are applicable for these assessments in accordance with the Charging Guidelines.
Download
Note: Save the form to your desktop or device. Open and complete the form using the latest version of Adobe Acrobat Reader. Do not work on the form in your web browser.
Download the Adobe Acrobat Reader mobile app for your smartphone or tablet.
If you are having difficulties completing this form, please see our 'Requesting assessment outside business hours - Request form trouble shooting' guide in the first instance.
- Requesting assessment outside business hours - Request form trouble shooting (PDF 803 KB)
- Requesting assessment outside business hours - Request form trouble shooting (DOCX 1.1 MB)
If you have difficulty accessing these files, contact us for help.
Assessment of onshore treatment results outside business hours
Requests to have onshore treatment results (Record of Fumigation) assessed outside business hours must be made using the form below.
Note: Overtime charges are applicable for these assessments in accordance with the Charging Guidelines.
Download
Note: Save the form to your desktop or device. Open and complete the form using the latest version of Adobe Acrobat Reader. Do not work on the form in your web browser.
Download the Adobe Acrobat Reader mobile app for your smartphone or tablet.
If you have difficulty accessing this file, contact us for help.
Booking an inspection
Inspection of goods and containers may be required:
- on arrival at the seaport or airport of first entry
- at a third party site that has been approved by the department.
Fees generally apply to inspections performed by the department.
Further information on the clearance and inspection of goods as well as how to book an inspection.
Payment
Where the department directly intervenes in the import or export process for a particular client (i.e. services are provided directly to an individual or organisation), charges may apply. Fee bearing activities may include assessment, inspection, husbandry and audit services; in addition to other services the department provides.
The department’s Charging Guidelines outlines fees and charges that may be applicable to import assessment and inspection activities.
Information on how to make a payment.