Facilitated by the Indigenous Rangers Biosecurity Program (IRBP), the biennial Indigenous Ranger Biosecurity Round Table is an opportunity for representatives of Indigenous ranger organisations delivering fee for service biosecurity to come together with the department to hold strategic discussions to help shape a shared, collective vision for the program. Open discussion and 2-way consultation provide insights into how everyone can learn from their combined experience and rangers’ invaluable knowledge of Country to help strengthen Australia’s biosecurity and protect Country. Feedback from ranger organisations, for example, will ensure that initiatives such as grant programs and biosecurity training opportunities are fit for purpose.
The 2 day event also provides an opportunity for Indigenous ranger groups to present case studies on their work, sharing knowledge and their stories - their successes and challenges - which is critical to forging and maintaining networks in what can sometimes be isolated work environments.
Feedback from the events have been overwhelmingly positive, affirming that the department is ‘on the right track’. Key stakeholders, Indigenous ranger organisations, have seen their input lead to tangible and noticeable changes already implemented. The Round Table demonstrates the department’s commitment to genuine consultation and co-design with First Nations stakeholders. It will strengthen and improve the IRBP thereby contributing to a stronger biosecurity Ranger network and stronger biosecurity for Australia.
Related
To learn more and keep up to date with the work of Indigenous rangers, subscribe to Frontline Rangers: Biosecurity in the north!
Watch
Northern Australia Indigenous Rangers Biosecurity Round Table
In June of 2024, the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry hosted the second Indigenous Rangers Biosecurity Round Table held in beautiful Larrakia Country Country up here in Darwin in the Northern Territory.
The Round Table is a pivotal gathering held once every two years and focuses on bringing together the leadership of northern Australian Indigenous ranger groups. Government officials and biosecurity experts. The event unites over 50 Indigenous Ranger leaders with key government representatives and aims to listen and learn from traditional knowledge and engage in strategic discussions into shaping the current and future initiatives of the Indigenous Ranger Biosecurity Program.
Nicole Brown, a proud Larrakia woman, set the stage by honouring the traditional custodians of the land and welcoming the attendees onto her country. This was followed by presentations by different ranger groups showcasing the successful biosecurity initiatives and cultural practices. There were a range of workshops that were facilitated by Jason Elsegood and Myra Fordham, with these sessions exploring current biosecurity practices and the integration of traditional knowledge for surveillance and protection.
The department also discussed the evolving role of rangers in biosecurity and outlining the future program directions. The event provided ample opportunities for participants to exchange ideas, build relationships and strengthen their commitment to environmental protection.
The Round Table is a testament to the power of collaboration, combining Indigenous perspectives with modern strategies to safeguard Australia’s natural heritage and environment for future generations. The department is committed to hosting it every two years and looks forward to seeing everyone in 2026.