March 2026 – Version 1.0

Future Drought Fund policy guidance

Funding Plan – guidance note for delivery partners

Purpose

Delivery partners have a responsibility to understand the Future Drought Fund (Drought Resilience Funding Plan 2024-2028) Determination 2024 (Funding Plan (2024-2028)) and ensure their work aligns with the funding principles. This guide is intended to assist current and prospective Future Drought Fund (FDF) delivery partners to understand their obligations, roles and responsibilities under the Funding Plan (2024-2028) and ensure compliance with legislative requirements.

This guide should be read alongside the Funding Plan (2024-2028) and Explanatory Statement.

The term ‘delivery partner’ refers to all individuals, businesses, organisations and other entities, government and non-government, involved in delivery of FDF funded activities (including devolved arrangements and grants).

The Drought Resilience Funding Plan

The FDF was established by the Future Drought Fund Act 2019 (the Act) to provide secure, continuous funding for initiatives that support Australian farmers and regional communities to prepare for, and become more resilient to, the impacts of future droughts.

Under the Act, the Drought Minister is required to issue a Drought Resilience Funding Plan (the Funding Plan), which is a legislative instrument under the Act that provides a high-level, principles-based framework to guide all funding decisions from the FDF Special Account. This means the design and delivery of FDF programs as well as any arrangements and grants (including devolved arrangements and grants) made under the programs must comply with the Funding Plan that is in force.

The Funding Plan does not specify programs, activities or delivery partners. Instead, it contains mandatory requirements for all spending from the FDF Special Account. For example, under the current Funding Plan (2024-2028) activities must deliver a public good and cannot provide in-drought assistance to directly address hardship (funding principles (3)(b) and (3)(c), respectively).

Every 4 years, the Funding Plan is reviewed and renewed to ensure FDF activities reflect the needs and lived experiences of farmers and their communities in building drought and climate resilience. Each new Funding Plan is an opportunity for the government of the day to set out its priorities for the FDF. These are informed by a legislated quadrennial Productivity Commission review and stakeholder consultation on the forthcoming FDF investment. The current Funding Plan (2024-2028) commenced on 9 February 2024 following public consultation and broad stakeholder support.

Both the Act and the Funding Plan (2024-2028) have accompanying explanatory material to support interpretation of requirements, including the funding principles.

Funding principles

The Funding Plan (2024-2028) has 2 types of funding principles to guide FDF spending:

Fund wide principles (s 6(2))

The first set of 11 principles guides decisions about the mix of FDF programs that will provide the greatest benefit for the community. These principles also provide guidance relevant to the design of individual arrangements and grants. While the fund wide principles are not mandatory, for every arrangement/grant, you should consider relevant opportunities for alignment. The Fund wide principles can be found in section 6(2) of the Funding Plan (2024-2028).

Principles relating to decisions about arrangements and grants (s 6(3))

The second set of 8 principles are mandatory requirements which all arrangements and grants must meet, including devolved arrangements and grants. All partners that deliver FDF activities must ensure that they align with these principles. Principles relating to decisions about arrangements and grants are provided in All funding decisions from 9 February 2024 must be consistent with the current Funding Plan (2024 2028).

Table 1 along with suggested considerations to ensure alignment.

All funding decisions from 9 February 2024 must be consistent with the current Funding Plan (2024 2028).

Table 1 Principles relating to decisions about arrangements and grants and considerations for alignment of activities with the funding principles

Frequently asked questions

Why do we need to align with the Funding Plan?

The Funding Plan is a legislative instrument that ensures the Fund is operating as intended, effectively and efficiently – it is a key mechanism for ensuring accountability and the responsible use of public resources.

Aligning with the Funding Plan improves the FDF’s capacity to deliver on its aim to build drought and climate resilience for the public good of the Australian agricultural sector, landscapes, and communities. Without proper alignment with the Funding Plan, the effectiveness of the FDF and its initiatives would be jeopardised.

Do the funding principles apply to devolved arrangements and grants?

Yes, the principles apply to all funding decisions from the FDF, which include devolved arrangements and grants. All partners delivering FDF activities must ensure that they do so consistently with the funding principles.

Do the current funding principles apply to programs implemented under the previous Funding Plan?

All programs, financial arrangements and contracts in place prior to 9 February 2024 are consistent with the previous Future Drought Fund (Drought Resilience Funding Plan 2020 to 2024) Determination 2020.

Funding decisions regarding these programs made after 9 February 2024, including contract variations that extend foundational programs, must comply with the current Funding Plan (2024-2028).

Do the funding principles apply to communications products?

Yes, in addition to relevant branding and co-branding requirements, communications products should align with the Funding Plan (2024-2028) and its funding principles. Communications products must be consistent with the principles relating to decisions about arrangements and grants (s 6 (3)).

Although not mandatory, the fund wide principles (s 6 (2)) should also be considered when developing communications materials to guide consistent FDF messaging.

Alignment with the funding principles should be factored into program design and financial agreements and, as such, these should be reflected in delivery partner communications and engagement plans to ensure consistent messaging.

Funding principle guidance

Drought resilience

The object of the Act is to enhance the public good by building drought resilience.

Building drought resilience is a complex and long-term endeavour, as continued adaptation is required to meet changing circumstances over time. This is reflected in the secure and continuous funding made available each year for drought resilience activities, under the FDF.

A key aspect of drought resilience is the ability to adapt, reorganise or transform in response to changing temperature, increasing variability and scarcity of rainfall and changed seasonality of rainfall, for improved economic, environmental and social resilience. The funding Plan (2024-2028) reflects this, focusing on building drought resilience through improved economic, environmental and social resilience. The Funding Plan (2024-2028) Explanatory statement provides an explanation of economic, environmental and social resilience.

Climate resilience

Drought and climate resilience activities and outcomes are often interconnected. Building resilience in one area can have multiple benefits of building resilience for managing other risks. While drought preparedness and resilience remain the key focus of the FDF, programs can consider a broader range of climatic risks where they meet the requirements in the Funding Plan (2024-2028).

In line with funding principle 6(2)(b), the FDF will support and prioritise activities that achieve mutually reinforcing drought and climate resilience outcomes.

Public good

The objective of the FDF is to enhance the public good by building drought resilience. Consistent with this, the benefits generated from FDF funding should be accessible and/or shared by many (public benefits), rather than be captured solely by individual businesses or industries for private commercial gain (private benefits).

Public good may be established where there are significant spill over benefits for society and the economy, well beyond those derived by private beneficiaries. Wherever activities could deliver both public and private benefits, relevant decisions should seek to leverage private or industry co-contributions (financial or in-kind) to offset private gains, where appropriate (see Co-contributions). Other relevant considerations include achieving value for money (including where the benefits achievable from the funding outweigh the costs) and maximising the impact of activities across Australia.

Examples of activities that enhance the public good by building drought resilience may include those that:

address information gaps

drive collective behavioural change or change at scale

maximise the value of research and development

enhance the natural resource base

build human capital through improved decision-making

build social capital through strengthening networks

share knowledge

improve overall well-being.

Co-contributions

Co-contributions are financial or in-kind investments provided alongside program funding. They strengthen outcomes and ensure that initiatives deliver public benefits by offsetting private gain.

Depending on the circumstances, these co-contributions could for example, come from a state or territory government, private investor, universities or another research organisation, philanthropic organisation or an individual.

Leveraging co-contributions acknowledges that the benefits and role of building drought preparedness and resilience in agriculture are shared across many sectors of the economy and all levels of government. Mandatory co-investment may be less appropriate where it would create a substantial barrier to uptake, for example where there is a known market failure or where a small community or community organisation cannot contribute due to financial constraints.

Transformational change

Transformational change is the ability to undertake wholescale change of a system when adverse events or risks make the current system untenable, i.e. changes to the fundamental attributes of a social-ecological system. It is a way of doing things differently and innovatively when it is clear that the current system is untenable and losing its resilience – for example, transforming from irrigated to dry crop production when water becomes scarce.

Transformational change is context dependent. While change at a large spatial scale may be transformational, it can also be achieved at smaller scales, including within a business. Transformational changes at smaller scale (farm/business) are often required to maintain resilience at larger scale (for example, broad landscape). The level of change that counts as ‘transformational’ is subjective and relative – considering the difference between a deliberate change (beyond what would typically occur) versus a background change.

Transformational change is a key feature of the second phase of the FDF. However, we recognise that such change should not be forced on those who are not ready, and that greater consideration should be given to the unique circumstances and contexts of farmers and regions.

In-drought assistance

working with state and territory governments to co-design programs that are dependent on interjurisdictional implementation.

undertaking proactive consultation with state and territory governments when designing other FDF programs.

FDF programs, grants and arrangements are available throughout the drought cycle. The FDF programs, grants and arrangements do not provide in-drought hardship support. The Funding Plan (2024-2028) specifically excludes in-drought assistance to directly address hardship, and the duplication of existing sources of support. Drought preparedness and resilience remain the key focus of the FDF; however, its activities and their outcomes have utility across the drought cycle.

FDF programs are designed to be flexible and responsive to on-ground conditions, particularly when drought conditions arise. For example, the Farm Business Resilience program has in-built flexibility to tailor activities to reflect the circumstances and needs of farmers during different stages of the drought cycle. Likewise, under the Regional Drought Resilience Planning program, regions may prioritise implementing actions in their plans that enable them to better manage through or recover from drought, thereby strengthening their drought resilience.

Knowledge sharing and access to information

FDF activities generate a wealth of information and knowledge that assists in building drought resilience. This knowledge is a valuable public resource. Sharing it supports the dissemination of drought resilience strategies among agricultural businesses and communities, facilitating their application. Knowledge sharing is a core rationale for public investment in FDF activities as it extends and amplifies public benefits.

Transparency and public access to government information are also important. Open access to FDF information and the data and knowledge gained from FDF funded activities enhances the community's ability to engage with the department and its delivery partners about FDF programs and activities. Information sharing enables the community to contribute to program development, participate in program delivery, provide evidence for decision-making, and evaluate performance. A free flow of information between government, businesses, and the community can also stimulate innovation, benefiting the nation economically and socially.

Acknowledgement of Country

We acknowledge the continuous connection of First Nations Traditional Owners and Custodians to the lands, seas and waters of Australia. We recognise their care for and cultivation of Country. We pay respect to Elders past and present, and recognise their knowledge and contribution to the productivity, innovation and sustainability of Australia’s agriculture, fisheries and forestry industries.

© Commonwealth of Australia 2026

All material in this publication is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Licence except content supplied by third parties, logos and the Commonwealth Coat of Arms.