“Ready Set Go! Preparing for Emergency Disease Outbreaks in Aquatic Animals” is a simulation exercise program that addresses a national priority under AQUAPLAN 2022-2027 activity 5.3. The program will deliver a series of national sector-specific, discussion-based emergency response exercises.
The program aims to improve industry and government preparedness to respond to nationally significant exotic animal disease outbreaks. This will help to prevent, or minimise, the impacts of exotic diseases on profitability and productivity. There are national preparedness arrangements in place that outline technical response arrangements, (e.g., the AQUAVETPLAN response manuals) but for many of these arrangements there has been no need to use them in a real-life response.
The program aims to test that technical response arrangements are fit for purpose and include sufficient practical information for use in a response. Any gaps or weaknesses in preparedness arrangements will be identified without the pressure of a real-world response and action plans will be developed to address the highest priorities. The program also aims to increase industry and government’s shared understanding of their responsibilities during a response, and the capabilities that they can bring to it.
Each exercise will focus on technical response arrangements and will be developed collaboratively by industry and government stakeholders. The program will also build national preparedness capability among industry and governments by involving personnel exercise planning and evaluation.
The Fisheries Research and Development Corporation funded the program (FRDC project 2021-048).
Exercise FlyWheel (2023) was the first simulation exercise conducted under the program. It was in held collaboration with the barramundi industry. It aimed to test the technical response arrangements for an exotic disease outbreak.
A link to the final report for the exercise will be provided here once complete.
For further information contact the Aquatic Pest and Health Policy section at: aah@aff.gov.au.