Department of Agriculture,
Water and the Environment
Future
Drought
Fund
Future Drought Fund
Improving drought 
resilience of Australian 
agricultural lands 
May 
2021
Stronger farm performance and resilience to drought and other climate risks can 
be achieved through improved management of natural capital, such as soils, water, 
groundcover and vegetation. 
Recognising this, the Drought Resilience Funding Plan 2020-2024 includes a priority of 
environmental resilience – building drought resilience through improved management of 
natural capital in agricultural landscapes. 
80 projects are already underway under the Future Drought Fund’s Natural Resource 
Management for Drought Resilience program.
The $23 million builds on this investment. It will support farmer groups, NRM bodies, 
agricultural organisations and others to test, demonstrate and disseminate land 
management practices that improve the drought resilience of agricultural land. 
Guidelines for the program will be developed with input from stakeholders on 
how to best pursue the intended outcomes of catalyzing transformations in land 
management practices.
A competitive process will open in late 2021.
•	The Australian Government is investing a further $23m to 2023–24 to trial and 
support uptake of land management practices that help keep farming land 
productive through times of drought.
•	Additional funding builds on the Future Drought Fund’s foundation year 
investment through the Natural Resource Management for Drought 
Resilience program. 
•	A competitive process will open in late 2021, following consultation on how 
best to target the investment to achieve transformational changes in land 
management practices.

Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment
Improving drought resilience of Australian agricultural lands 
For more information
agriculture.gov.au/fdf
Be informed
For more information, see Future Drought Fund. You can 
also register for updates at our haveyoursay.awe.gov.au/
future-drought-fund.
ADA212.0521