Follow the progress of the renewed Australian Animal Welfare Strategy (AAWS). This page provides the
latest updates on the development of the AAWS, roadmap activities and information about the
development of the strategy.
Latest update
This section provides latest progress updates for the renewal of the AAWS. See the visual roadmap
below for key milestones.
As at July 2026 – work is focused on:
targeted engagement and revisions of the overarching strategy
targeted engagement and refinement of the remaining 3 animal group chapters
The Australian Animal Welfare Strategy progress factsheet
Stay up to date as renewal of the AAWS progresses. These updates provide an insight into activities
undertaken to inform strategy development and where each chapter of the AAWS is up to. Last updated
July 2026.
Download
If you have difficulty accessing these files, contact us for help.
Roadmap to the renewed AAWS
Animal group chapters
The AAWS will include all animals. Each chapter will be dedicated to one of 6 animal groups, with the
strategy expected to be finalised in 2027:
Animals in production systems, including livestock such as terrestrial mammals, poultry and
crocodiles.
Aquatic animals commercially farmed or harvested in their own environment
Aquatic animals caught or used in recreation activities (recreational fishing, the ornamental/
aquarium industry).
Native animals, including marine fauna
Introduced and feral animals, including feral animals harvested in the wild

Native animal management, including animals that are harvested in their own environment
Marine animal management, excluding animals that are harvested in their own environment
Native wildlife parks and rescues
The conservation and scientific study of native animals in captivity.
All animals that are kept as pets, including dogs, cats, rabbits, fish, birds, amphibians, reptiles,
ferrets and rodents
Breeding and behavioural training of companion animals
Horses, donkeys and mules, poultry and other animals typically used in production systems kept
on hobby farms or as pets.
Animals used for work (e.g. service animals, support animals of any species, muster dogs)
Animals used in sport (e.g. horse racing, greyhound racing, equestrian events)
Animals used in recreation (e.g. circuses, magicians, rodeos, zoos, dog events)
Animals involved in recreational hunting.
All animals used in research and teaching.
The parameters for each chapter have been developed based on feedback from stakeholders and
consideration of the previous AAWS. Many animal welfare considerations are relevant to multiple
species, chapters and stakeholder groups.
Priority work streams
The overarching strategy is supported by the following 6 priority work streams that provide a consistent
framework across every chapter:
Leadership and coordination
Standards and implementation
Reporting and compliance
Research and development
Education and communication
International engagement
These priority work streams:
build on the goals of the previous strategy
were agreed during the first round of consultation
are now embedded in the National Statement on Animal Welfare.
Goals and objectives for each work stream will be included in the final AAWS.

How the priority work streams, goals and objectives and chapters work
together
AAWS overarching strategy document Animal group chapters
Draws on the National Statement on Animal
Welfare to include a vision, context setting
and the 6 priority work streams outlined
above.
This document will also identify goals and
objectives aligned to each priority work
stream.
Each chapter is dedicated to 1 of 6 animal groups.
Each animal group chapter will provide a snapshot of the
current sector’s environment, including achievements
and challenges, and identify opportunities for continuous
improvement.
Frequently asked questions
Q: When will the renewed AAWS be completed?
A: The renewed Australian Animal Welfare Strategy is expected to be finalised in 2027.
Q: How often is this page updated?
A: This page is updated as milestones are reached, including consultation outcomes and other key
developments.
Q: How can I stay informed about the progress of the renewed AAWS?
A: Visit this page regularly for the latest progress updates and subscribe to The AAWS Connection
newsletter to receive updates directly.
See more

Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/animal/welfare/aaws/roadmap-toward-renewal