1 
Stakeholder communication and 
engagement policy 
Live Animal Export Branch 
Introduction 
live animals and animal reproductive material in accordance with the Export Control Act 2020 and 
the Export Control (Animals) Rules 2021. 
Stakeholder communication and engagement activities are core functions of an effective regulator 
and support day-to-day interactions with regulated entities through to the development of fit-for-
purpose operational policy and standards. 
1 
Purpose 
This policy describes the circumstances, practices and platforms the department may use to engage 
with live animal export stakeholders. 
2 
Stakeholders 
External stakeholders include but are not limited to: 
accredited veterinarians (AAV) 
agents for livestock, other live animals and animal reproductive material 
animal health bodies 
animal welfare groups 
community groups 
live animal exporters, including animal reproductive material exporters 
national, state or territory farming organisations 
national, state or territory peak export industry bodies 
national, state or territory producer bodies 
other Australian, state or territory governments, including the Office of Impact Analysis 
producers and farmers 
registered establishment occupiers 
other interested parties.

2 
3 
Communication and engagement channels 
The department uses a variety of targeted channels and consultation mechanisms to communicate 
and engage with its stakeholders. This ensures there are reasonable opportunities to be heard, and 
to support effective and diverse representation. These practices align with the department’s 
Regulatory practice statement. 
The department will use the most appropriate communication channels for the given intent, 
audience, messaging and desired outcomes. These can be formal, informal, interactive, educational, 
face to face, directional and/or advisory, and may include: 
brochures, information packs, reports 
departmental webpages, media releases, department spokesperson/address or general updates 
direct correspondence, such as via email or telephone 
education and training events 
export advisory notices (EAN) and market access notices (MAN) 
Have Your Say and other survey platforms 
round tables, forums, seminars, focus groups, working groups, consultations 
social media, including X (formerly Twitter), Facebook, LinkedIn 
webinars, teleconferences. 
Stakeholders are encouraged to contact us to discuss preferred engagement methods, such as on an 
individual or group basis, or if there are difficulties or concerns around providing a formal 
submission. 
4 
Engagement circumstances and feedback mechanisms 
Appendix A outlines circumstances where the department engages with specific stakeholder groups. 
To support effective engagement, the department will: 
consider the timing of consultation processes, and provide additional time if they occur over 
busy or holiday periods 
notify stakeholders of the dates and known details of upcoming engagement at the earliest 
practicable opportunity to support planning and participation 
periodically evaluate its communication and engagement activities to determine whether they 
are effective and whether messages are being understood. 
When undertaking reviews or a formal consultation process, the department will prepare a response 
to submissions. This could be a separate consultation summary response or be included within a final 
report. The response to submissions will summarise the consultation undertaken, what was heard, 
the themes that came through and how the feedback received was used to improve outcomes. 
In all circumstances, the department protects information that is of a sensitive or confidential nature 
so as not to compromise any person, place or organisation as it deems necessary and in line with all

3 
relevant legislation. Information obtained under, or in accordance with, the Export Control Act 2020 
is protected information and may only be used or disclosed in accordance with the Act. 
5 
Providing public comment on livestock exports 
Where issues occur during the export of livestock, the department is limited in what it can publicly 
comment on. The department’s legal and decision-making obligations around information disclosure 
vary depending on the nature of the issue. 
When considering whether to make a statement about a consignment, the department balances the 
potential public benefit of doing so against its responsibilities and restrictions under the 
legislation. Further considerations include: 
legislative restrictions under the Export Control Act 2020, Export Control (Animals) Rules 2021 
and the Privacy Act 1988 
personal, sensitive (including commercially sensitive) or confidential information 
whether the incident (or a related incident) is under active investigation 
the application of procedural fairness principles 
resourcing priorities and responsibilities. 
As a result of legal constraints, communications from the department may sometimes be ambiguous. 
It may also take some time before public comments on regulatory activities, including outcomes of 
decisions, can be made, particularly in complex situations. 
Where possible, the department aims to keep stakeholders informed and to support transparency, 
accountability and public confidence in the department. 
6 
Related material 
Export advisory notices 
Export Control Act 2020 
Export Control (Animals) Rules 2021 
Exporting live animals 
Have Your Say website (DAFF) 
Market access notices 
Public comment on livestock exports 
Regulating live animal exports 
Regulatory practice statement

4 
Appendix A: Stakeholder engagement circumstances and platforms 
Circumstance 
Primary stakeholder audience 
includes 
Reason 
Platforms that may be utilised 
Routine interactions with our 
regulated entities, on day-to-day 
operations. For example: 
− AAV application assessments 
− licence or approved 
arrangement assessments 
− notice of intention to export 
(NOI) assessments. 
AAVs 
live animal exporters 
other government departments 
registered establishment 
occupiers 
The department will communicate with individual stakeholders 
directly and in-confidence where a particular activity directly concerns 
their operations (such as licence or approved arrangement 
assessments). 
There are circumstances where the department can only 
communicate with certain persons in a livestock export business. They 
must be nominated under the relevant export licence as a person in 
management or control. This is a requirement under the Act. Read 
more about management or control and directing export operations. 
The department will not consult with other stakeholders on these day-
to-day operations. The nature of the engagement is regulatory and 
appropriate to be between the regulator and the regulated entity. 
telephone and/or email notifications, 
instructions and advice 
written correspondence (such as 
email or formal notices) 
Non-routine interactions with 
regulated entities and other 
stakeholders. 
This may include interactions 
relating to: 
− claims of Export Supply Chain 
Assurance System (ESCAS) non-
compliances 
− compliance activities 
− significant regulatory decisions 
or livestock export incidents. 
affected parties where 
appropriate 
The department has different legal and decision-making 
responsibilities in respect of individual regulatory decisions, which are 
dependent on the issue. 
In relation to non-routine interactions, the department will consult 
directly and in confidence with affected regulated entities. 
Third parties and other stakeholders may provide a submission to the 
department for its consideration on any regulatory matter. However, 
the department will use its discretion when deciding whether to 
respond to, or action, any submission it receives as it deems 
necessary. 
The department will not seek input, consult or engage in active 
dialogue with third party stakeholders, in circumstances where a 
departmental employee has the statutory authority under relevant 
export legislation to make a decision. 
The department may use its discretion and legislative authority to 
publicly communicate major regulatory decisions.  
department website, including for 
− stakeholder consultation, public 
notification or general 
information 
− media releases, department 
spokesperson/address, incident 
update or other public statement 
written correspondence (such as 
email or formal notices)

5 
Policy, guidelines and procedures 
development that affect export 
operations. 
For example, policies to support 
compliance with the Australian 
Standards for the Export of 
Livestock (ASEL), such as how to 
appropriately calculate voyage 
length and feed and water 
provisions. 
AAVs 
live animal exporters 
peak industry bodies 
registered establishment 
occupiers 
Where policies affect export operations, stakeholders that are directly 
or indirectly impacted will be consulted to ensure any new or updated 
requirements are practical and fit for purpose, and appropriate 
guidance material is available. 
For formal consultation, the department will prepare a response 
summarising the consultation undertaken, what was heard, and how 
the feedback received was used to improve outcomes. 
The department may not respond to individual submissions, at its 
discretion. 
department website and social media 
platforms 
feedback platforms 
stakeholder working group meetings 
training sessions 
via key representative industry 
bodies 
written correspondence (such as 
email or formal notices) 
Standards, reviews, reforms and 
legislation. For example: 
− consultation on proposed 
amendments to export 
legislation, such as changes to 
the Export Control Act 2020 
and Export Control (Animals) 
Rules 2021 
− live export standards and 
reviews, such as reviews and 
implementation of the ASEL. 
all relevant stakeholders 
The department will engage widely to ensure subject matter experts 
are engaged, stakeholders are given a platform to be heard, and 
relevant considerations are reviewed by the department. 
For standards, reviews and reform work, the department will engage 
with all relevant stakeholders to ensure it obtains a holistic and 
evidence-based understanding on a wide range of matters that may 
affect, and be affected by, any new or updated requirements. 
For formal consultation, the department will prepare a response 
summarising the consultation undertaken, what was heard, and how 
the feedback received was used to improve outcomes. 
The department may not respond to individual submissions, at its 
discretion. 
department website and social media 
platforms 
events, seminars and other forums 
Have Your Say, other survey and 
market research platforms 
stakeholder working group meetings 
training sessions 
written correspondence (such as 
email or formal notices) 
via key representative and industry 
bodies

6 
Version control 
Version 
Date of issue 
Author 
Reason for change 
1.0 
April 2022 
Live Animal Export Branch 
First publication 
2.0 
April 2023 
Live Animal Export Branch 
Added content relating to persons in 
management or control 
Updated department branding and document 
formatting 
3.0 
March 2026 
Live Animal Export Branch 
Updated to include information about public 
comment for livestock exports 
Updated to address relevant Inspector General 
recommendations 
Acknowledgement of Country 
We acknowledge the continuous connection of First Nations Traditional Owners and Custodians to the lands, seas and 
waters of Australia. We recognise their care for and cultivation of Country. We pay respect to Elders past and present, and 
recognise their knowledge and contribution to the productivity, innovation and sustainability of Australia’s agriculture, 
fisheries and forestry industries. 
© Commonwealth of Australia 2026 
Commonwealth of Australia (referred to as the Commonwealth). 
All material in this publication is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Licence except content 
supplied by third parties, logos and the Commonwealth Coat of Arms. 
and skill in preparing and compiling the information and data in this publication. Notwithstanding, the Department of 
Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, its employees and advisers disclaim all liability, including liability for negligence and for 
any loss, damage, injury, expense or cost incurred by any person as a result of accessing, using or relying on any of the 
information or data in this publication to the maximum extent permitted by law.