The AFFTAC is a subcommittee of the Plant Health Committee (PHC). It oversees Australia’s National Fruit Fly Management Protocol (ANFFMP) for the PHC.

Priorities

The AFFTAC supports delivery of relevant schedules under the Intergovernmental Agreement on Biosecurity (IGAB).

The AFFTAC oversees the maintenance, development and implementation of the ANFFMP to ensure:

- a nationally coordinated approach to surveillance and management for fruit flies

- the ANFFMP is technically justified

- the ANFFMP is consistent with Australia’s international import and export market access conditions and policies.

Technical support

The AFFTAC ensures ANFFMP is technically supported and fit for purpose. The sub-committee:

- develops ANFFMP delivery guidelines for pre-outbreak, post-outbreak, reinstatement and system controls processes

- develops requirements for a Pest Free Place of Production (PFPP) assessment framework under the International standards for sanitary measures (ISPM )10

- reviews technical submissions.

The AFFTAC identifies and implements improvements. It supports a contemporary and consistent national management approach for fruit fly. This includes preparedness, diagnostics, surveillance, and response activities.

Advice

The AFFTAC advises the PHC, other subcommittees, jurisdictions, and various expert groups on:

- operational actions outside the scope of the ANFFMP

- domestic fruit fly market access protocols

- the national Sterile Insect Technique (SIT) policy

- contingency planning for exotic fruit flies

- research priorities so that the ANFFMP remains technically supported

- additional fruit fly species to be included in the ANFFMP

- population dynamics, reproductive patterns, life and seasonal cycles and distribution of fruit flies.

Working groups

The AFFTAC has formed 5 working groups to support the delivery of its priorities.

Controlled Movement Zone Working Group

The group investigates reductions of the default size of the Controlled Movement Zone (CMZ) boundary. It does this based on current scientific evidence and technical information.

CMZs are put in place to protect areas that are free from the pest as part of managing an outbreak.

The Delivery Guideline Working Group

The group develops, reviews and updates delivery guidelines for pre-outbreak, post-outbreak, reinstatement, and system controls processes. The guidelines are clear and practical and reflect best practice in the field.

The Market Access Working Group

The group reviews and develops technical requirements for a Pest Free Place of Production (PFPP) assessment framework against ISPM 10.

Technical Review Working Group

The group annually reviews fruit fly research and development. It identifies where the ANFFMP could be improved.

This work supports the adoption of outputs from the Strengthening Australia's Fruit Fly System Research Program as well as from other research activities.

The Exotic Fruit Fly Working Group

The group is developing a response strategy for oriental fruit fly outbreaks. This strategy will apply to outbreaks on mainland Australia and will:

- provide technical support for operational activities

- inform jurisdictional response plans during an outbreak.

Membership

AFFTAC members include representatives from the:

- state and territory governments

Members have voting rights on matters requiring decision. Members represent their organisation and vote on behalf of their government.

Observers

Observers attend meetings, but do not have voting rights.

They participate in AFFTAC business in an advisory or consultative capacity. Observers participate in out-of-session items and working groups relevant to their expertise.

Observers may come from government agencies, statutory authorities, or government-industry-co-funded companies.

Current observers on the AFFTAC include a representative from Plant Health Australia (PHA).

Invited guests may attend meetings for a range of purposes, including provision of technical advice for specific agenda items. Attendance is approved by the Chair.

Chair

The AFFTAC is chaired on a rotational basis. Each member or jurisdiction will serve as Chair for the appointed term.

The Chair is responsible for the operation of the AFFTAC and its working groups. They provide leadership and facilitate meetings.

Secretariat

If you have general questions about the AFFTAC, you can contact the secretariat via ordinary mail to:

AFFTAC Secretariat

GPO Box 858 Canberra ACT 2601

or by email to: afftac@aff.gov.au

Meetings

The AFFTAC meets face-to-face twice a year. Extra meetings for urgent business are held online as required.

Communiqués

Downloads

- Australian Fruit Fly Technical Advisory Subcommittee Communiqué - AFFTAC07 (PDF 156 KB)

- Australian Fruit Fly Technical Advisory Subcommittee Communiqué - AFFTAC07 (DOCX 102 KB)

If you have difficulty accessing these files, contact us for help.

See more

Essential reading to understand fruit fly management in Australia:

Our Menu of Measures tool will help you manage trade related plant biosecurity risks.