The PBPWG helps Australia prepare to respond to exotic plant pest and disease threats.

The group supports a nationally coordinated and collaborative approach to preparedness for potential incursions of National Priority Plant Pests (NPPPs).

The PBPWG reports to the Plant Health Committee (PHC), which oversees the group’s work program. It also sets priorities to align with national commitments.

Exotic pests and diseases are those not found or established in Australia.

Purpose

The PBPWG strengthens Australia’s preparedness for a plant pest or disease incursion. The group helps drive our national plant biosecurity preparedness commitments. It improves our capacity to prevent, detect, manage, respond and recover from an incursion.

The PBPWG supports activities under the:

- National Plant Biosecurity Strategy (NPBS)

- National Plant Biosecurity Preparedness Strategy (NPBPS)

This includes input into action plans and how to implement them.

The group also supports delivery of the Intergovernmental Agreement on Biosecurity (IGAB) and national priority reforms.

Priorities

The PBPWG uses national strategies to inform it’s priorities, which include to:

- oversee National Action Plans (NAPs) for NPPPs on behalf of the PHC

- support industry contingency plan development for priority plant pests

- identify and address gaps and risks in preparedness across the national plant biosecurity system

- maintain the NPPP Resource Portal (Repository of Information) and associated technical materials

- contribute to future preparedness strategies and promote risk-based prioritisation of investment

- bring stakeholders together to improve plant biosecurity preparedness

Membership and meetings

Members include representatives from the Australian, state and territory governments. They are nominated based on their expertise. Members give the PHC technical advice on how prepare for plant health threats.

The coordinator position is rotated among members on a nomination basis.

Observers may come from government agencies, statutory authorities, or government-industry co-funded companies. They include representatives from CSIRO and Plant Health Australia. Observers don’t have voting rights.

The PBPWG meet face-to-face twice a year.

Contact us

PBPWG Secretariat email pbpwg@aff.gov.au.

Mail address GPO Box 858 Canberra ACT 2601

Phone 1800 900 090