Page 1 of 16 
Recommendations for enterprise level Abalone Health Accreditation Program 
(AHAP) 
Version 3.0 
Document prepared by the Sub-committee on Aquatic Animal Health 
Version control 
Version Number 
Year 
Revision description 
1.0 
2014 
2.0 
2024 
Minor changes to sentinel program 
3.0 
2026 
Minor changes to appendix 1

Page 2 of 16 
Purpose: 
• 
To describe recommended requirements by which abalone producers may establish and 
maintain disease-free status of a defined abalone population for abalone viral 
ganglioneuritis (AVG). 
• 
These requirements will facilitate safe translocation of abalone within or between 
jurisdictions. 
1. Introduction: 
Need and objectives 
The objective of the Abalone Health Accreditation Program (AHAP) is to provide advice on the 
technical requirements of a health accreditation scheme that will enable the abalone aquaculture 
industry to demonstrate compartment freedom from diseases of concern.  
Establishing and maintaining disease free status for an entire jurisdiction may not be possible in 
some circumstances, particularly when a disease is established in wild animal populations. 
However, while a disease may be endemic in a jurisdiction, sub-populations that have a higher 
health status can be established and maintained through a range of physical and operational 
measures. The term “compartment” is used here to describe an aquaculture production system 
(e.g. hatchery through to processing) with a distinct health status for a specific disease (or 
diseases) and for which clearly documented measures are applied to maintain the disease-free 
status to enable the “compartment” to be declared by the Competent Authority. 
Possible benefits of national recommendations for the requirements of an abalone health 
accreditation scheme are: 
• 
To advise industry and government on recommended minimum requirements for intra and 
interstate movements  
• 
To facilitate cost effective and safe translocation of live abalone and product between farms 
and/ or jurisdictions 
• 
To meet international export certification requirements 
• 
To provide health certified abalone stock suitable for open and semi-open systems (re-
seeding/stock enhancement/open water aquaculture) 
• 
To develop an auditable accreditation scheme controlled by the Competent Authority (CA).  
Background 
Abalone viral ganglioneuritis (AVG) was first detected in Australia on two land-based abalone 
farms in Victoria during December 2005. The disease had not previously been reported in 
Australia. By July 2006 a total of 4 Victorian farms were confirmed with the disease and had been 
destocked. No further instances of AVG on farms located in Victoria have been reported since. The 
disease was subsequently found to occur in the natural environment in May 2006 and disease 
continued along the Victorian coastline affecting wild populations of abalone until early 2010. In 
May 2021 there was another detection in the western fishing zone of Victoria and it is now 
presumed that this area is endemically infected with intermittent disease occurrences. 
Following initial detection in Tasmania in 2008, that State experienced a series of AVG outbreaks 
until 2011. All outbreaks were associated with translocations of wild caught abalone to live-holding 
facilities located within processing plants. There was also one outbreak on a farm in early 2011. 
The farm outbreak was also shown to be linked to disease in a neighbouring processing plant. The 
virus is believed to occur endemically in wild abalone in parts of Tasmania. 
Disease was also confirmed in wild abalone in the southern zone of South Australia in February 
2024. At the time of writing, no farms have been impacted in that state.

Page 3 of 16 
The culture and wild capture abalone industries, in conjunction with governments, have responded 
to this disease with a range of measures including surveillance projects, enhanced biosecurity, 
investigations into epidemiology and education campaigns for both recreational and commercial 
fishing industries.  
Context 
The World Organisation for Animal Health (WOAH) Aquatic Animal Health Code outlines basic 
principles that should be adhered to when translocating abalone stock, however specific details on 
appropriate surveillance and biosecurity remains the responsibility of individual jurisdictions. 
Throughout Australia, the movement of live abalone between regions and jurisdictions is 
administered by State and Territory authorities. Such movements have either been prohibited 
outright or assessed on an individual basis with control measures applied according to the relevant 
acceptable level of risk.  
In order to reduce risks associated with AVG, live abalone movements, where permitted, have 
traditionally relied on batch testing, which is expensive, cannot guarantee stock freedom and 
cannot be used to provide ongoing accreditation of a premises without documented biosecurity 
measures. Some variation exists in pre-movement conditions between jurisdictions, which may 
result in confusion within the industry. 
The AHAP recommendations are consistent with accepted WOAH standards and ensure 
requirements are transparent. When implemented by abalone farms the AHAP will provide greater 
confidence for the safe movement of abalone between states or production premises beyond the 
current batch testing arrangements that are in place. The program provides guidance for an 
accreditation system based on compartment concepts. It is designed to allow movement of 
abalone between regions and eliminate the need for batch testing. Such programs currently exist 
within other livestock sectors in Australia and overseas, for example SheepMAP and CattleMAP 
(see http://www.animalhealthaustralia.com.au/programs/johnes-disease/market-assurance-
programs-maps/ 
The AHAP has been developed to provide consistent requirements for abalone aquaculture 
enterprises by which they may establish disease free compartments and address biosecurity risks 
inherent in any stock translocation. By doing so the program aims to establish a consistent 
extremely low risk from a qualitative risk perspective for abalone imports across all accredited 
premises (compartments). From a risk assessment perspective, although the likelihood of disease 
transfer may be managed through the program, consequence of disease transfer will continue to 
vary between individual jurisdictions, and thus affect outcomes of any risk assessment 
made.                                                                                                                                                                              
Scope of the program 
This AHAP considers only abalone viral ganglioneuritis (AVG), which is caused by infection with 
abalone herpesvirus. For simplicity, the disease and causative agent will be referred to as AVG 
throughout this document.  Whilst this program specifically addresses AVG, it can form the model 
for other important disease pathogens such as Perkinsus spp. 
This program only refers to cultured abalone on land based farms (semi-closed facilities). Semi-
open and open farms e.g. cage farms and sea ranching are not within the scope of these 
recommendations.  
Characteristics of the disease 
Within Australia, abalone herpesvirus has been demonstrated to be the causative agent for 
abalone viral ganglioneuritis. Current research classifies herpes viruses into three major groups, of 
which oyster herpesvirus and the abalone herpesvirus are the only representatives within 
Malacoherpesviridae.   
Australian abalone species confirmed as being susceptible to AVG include the greenlip abalone 
(Haliotis laevigata), blacklip abalone (Haliotis rubra) together with hybrids of these, and roe’s

Page 4 of 16 
abalone (Haliotis roei). However, other species within the Haliotis genus are also considered likely 
to be susceptible.  
Disease has been shown to be highly infectious, with outbreaks spreading quickly (i.e. within days) 
through susceptible populations. Outbreaks of AVG in both farmed and wild abalone populations in 
Australia were associated with the rapid onset of high mortality rates (up to 90%) in all age classes.  
Horizontal transmission has been demonstrated experimentally. Vertical transmission has not been 
demonstrated, but cannot be ruled out at this time.  
Incubation periods have been shown to be as short as 2 days via bath immersion under 
experimental conditions, but are considered to range from 5 to 7 days under field conditions. 
Research at CSIRO AAHL has demonstrated that viability of the virus in water is temperature 
dependant, with survival periods greater at lower temperatures. The virus is unlikely to remain 
viable outside the host for longer than 24 hours at temperatures above 15oC.     
To date outbreaks of disease have occurred on Victorian farms and within the natural marine 
environment in that State. Disease has also occurred in Tasmanian processor and farm live-
holding systems, and within closed NSW live-seafood holding systems. The virus has subsequently 
been eradicated from all infected farms and live-holding premises following de-stocking and 
decontamination procedures..  
A similar disease has been reported in Taiwan, however it has not yet been confirmed how similar 
this virus is to that found in Australia. 
Recent surveillance of healthy wild Tasmanian abalone has indicated a sub-clinical prevalence of 
approximately 7% by PCR testing (unpublished data).  This suggests that some populations of 
Tasmanian abalone may have a degree of innate resistance to clinical disease. Sub-clinical 
carriage of the virus is likely to have occurred in Tasmanian and Victorian wild abalone. 
Epidemiological assumptions used in this protocol are summarised in Appendix 2. 
Aquatic animal health services  
It is acknowledged that State and Territory Competent Authorities need to provide satisfactory 
veterinary services to enable enterprise establishment and maintain compartments. This document 
does not provide specific requirements for a Competent Authority to support implementation and 
auditing of the program. Instead it is assumed that the competent authorities within Australian 
States and Territories provide satisfactory services across several theme areas including: 
• 
Human, Physical and Financial Resources  
• 
Technical Authority and Capability 
• 
Interaction with Stakeholders 
• 
Access to Markets  
The WOAH Performance of Veterinary Services Tool, the Aquatic (PVS tool), can be used as an 
internationally accepted framework to determine whether a Competent Authority can adequately 
oversee application of the AHAP. The PVS tool addresses technical capabilities within the four 
theme areas above. These capabilities include: communication, legal delegation, stakeholder 
compliance, audit, health certification, professional staffing, transparency and traceability, 
biosecurity planning, emergency response, research capacity, training, surveillance models, 
laboratory result dispute resolution, diagnostic capacity and laboratory accreditation etc.   
2. General conditions for declaration of freedom 
The following section outlines general recommendations for the movement of live abalone within 
Australia. Recommendations have been modified from Chapter 11.1 within the WOAH Code 
20243.

Page 5 of 16 
Declaration of an AVG free compartment (farm) within Australia  
A compartment free of AVG may be established within any State or Territory by the Competent 
Authority(ies) of the relevant State or Territory if the compartment meets one or more of the criteria 
described below (1, 2, 3 or 4), in addition to satisfying specific conditions outlined elsewhere in this 
document.  
Criteria 1: Susceptible species not present (may be relevant to the NT) 
In a State or Territory of unknown status for AVG where none of the susceptible species is present, 
a farm compartment may be declared free from AVG when basic biosecurity conditions have been 
continuously met for a minimum period1.  As part of the basic biosecurity conditions the accredited 
compartment must have an approved and auditable biosecurity plan.    
or 
Criteria 2: Susceptible species present but no reports of disease (may be relevant to parts 
of Australia, eg. WA)  
Within a State or Territory of unknown status for AVG, but where there has been no observed 
occurrence of the disease for at least the past ten years, a farm compartment may be declared free 
from AVG when basic biosecurity conditions have been continuously met for at least the minimum 
period1. As part of the basic biosecurity conditions the accredited compartment must have an 
approved biosecurity plan.    
or 
Criteria 3: AVG pathogen known to occur in the natural environment (may be relevant to 
Victoria, South Australia and Tasmania) 
Within a State or Territory where the last known clinical occurrence was within the past ten years 
and/or where infection within the natural environment is known to occur, a farm compartment may 
be declared free from AVG when: 
a. 
Basic biosecurity conditions have been continuously met for at least the minimum 
period1  
and 
b. 
Targeted surveillance in accordance with conditions outlined below within section 
3.3 has been undertaken without detection of AVG. 
or 
Criteria 4: Detection of infection in a free compartment  
A compartment previously declared free from AVG but in which the disease is detected and 
confirmed may again be declared free from AVG when the following conditions have been met: 
a. On confirmation of the disease, the source of the infection was confidently identified 
and  
b. Basic biosecurity conditions have been reviewed, modified as necessary and 
incorporated into the farm compartment biosecurity plan  
and 
c. Infected populations have been destroyed or removed from the infected area by 
means that minimise the likelihood of further spread of the disease, and the 
appropriate decontamination procedures have been completed 
and 
d. Targeted surveillance has been in place for at least the minimum period1 without 
detection of AVG.  
1: A minimum period being 6 months including one summer.

Page 6 of 16 
Maintenance of free status 
A compartment that is declared free from AVG may maintain its status as “AVG free” provided that 
basic biosecurity conditions are continuously maintained. 
A compartment that is declared free from AVG following the provisions of Criteria 3 must continue 
targeted surveillance at a level described within this document and be audited by the relevant 
Competent Authority. 
Importation of live aquatic animals from a compartment declared free from abalone herpes 
virus 
When importing live abalone from a compartment declared free from AVG, the relevant Competent 
Authority of the importing State should require an animal health certificate issued by the Competent 
Authority of the exporting State. The health certificate should certify whether the place of 
production of the abalone is a compartment declared free from AVG in accordance with this AHAP.  
General conditions for the accreditation of an AVG-free compartment are summarised in Table 1. 
1: A minimum period being 6 months including one summer.

Page 7 of 16 
Table 1: Summary of general conditions 
Approved 
biosecurity 
plan 
required 
Two-stage 
surveillance 
required 
Sentinel /whole 
farm surveillance 
required 
Assessment 
of adjacent 
environment 
required 
Assessment 
of other local 
abalone 
facilities 
required 
Criteria 1: Susceptible 
species not present 
Yes 
No 
No 
No 
Yes 
Criteria 2: No reports 
of disease but 
susceptible species 
present 
Yes 
No 
Recommended 
No 
Yes 
Criteria 3: Pathogen 
present in natural 
environment  
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Case 4: Disease/ 
pathogen detected in 
compartment 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
3. Elements of the Program 
Technical details for the conduct of the AHAP are found in the “Revised AHAP Standard Operating 
Procedure” (available on the SCAAH Share Point) 
3.1 Identification of the compartment 
The purpose of establishing a compartment is to maintain a subpopulation with a distinct health 
status—for this program an AVG-free population. For a compartment to be designated AVG-free it 
must be clearly defined and all of its components described. These components include all 
functional units within the production system that are epidemiologically linked such as brood stock 
facilities, hatcheries, nurseries, grow-out areas and processing facilities. Any potential 
epidemiological links between the aquatic animals within the compartment and susceptible species 
outside the compartment must be described so that management measures can be implemented 
to prevent disease transmission. 
The description of the compartment should address the following (adapted from the WOAH Aquatic 
code): 
1. Biosecurity  
The integrity of a compartment relies on a combination of infrastructure and operational 
activities to provide effective biosecurity. The compartment’s biosecurity plan should 
describe how the risks of entry of the pathogen of concern are to be managed. It should 
also address geographic factors that may contribute to the maintenance of effective 
biosecurity (e.g. proximity of other farmed or wild susceptible populations). The 
biosecurity plan will describe procedures for documentation and auditing to maintain 
compartment disease-free status.  
2. Surveillance  
Internal surveillance is required to provide ongoing assurance of disease freedom and to 
provide early detection in the event that the agent of concern enters the compartment. 
External monitoring may be required to identify any change in risk profile associated with 
change in distribution of the pathogen or incidence of disease external to the 
compartment.  
3.2 Biosecurity plan

Page 8 of 16 
A draft generic aquaculture biosecurity plan is currently being prepared by SCAAH and should be 
consulted once it becomes available. 
As stated in  the WOAH Chapter 4.2 on zoning and compartmentalisation, the integrity of the 
compartment relies on effective biosecurity. For this reason, a comprehensive biosecurity plan that 
is transparent and can be audited should be developed. This should describe and address in detail 
the pathways for introduction, spread and transmission of AVG into, through and from the 
compartment, taking into account the features of the compartment.  
The biosecurity plan should describe training, records management and administration of the 
compartment. Measures to mitigate exposure at each critical control point identified in association 
with animal movement, people, equipment, water, feed and waste need to be detailed.  
The plan will include standard operating procedures that document actions to mitigate risk and 
mechanisms for ensuring that protocols are followed. Changes in the level of risk or exposure 
require contingency planning and modification of the overall plan to address the altered risk profile.  
Clear reporting procedures to the Competent Authority and processes consistent with the WOAH 
Evaluation of Performance of Veterinary Services (PVS) Tool should be in place. Training and 
education in all relevant aspects of farm biosecurity, auditing processes and response procedures 
must be documented in the biosecurity plan. 
Certification of a biosecurity plan by an independent 3rd party will include the following hazard 
analysis and critical control point (HACCP) steps (FDA, 2013): 
1. 
Conduct a hazard analysis 
2. 
Determine critical control points 
3. 
Establish critical limits 
4. 
Establish monitoring procedures 
5. 
Establish corrective actions 
6. 
Establish verification procedures 
7. 
Establish record keeping and documentation procedures 
Figure 1 – Biosecurity risks to abalone farms (High risk movements onto farms are highlighted in red) 
Intake water 
Broodstock 
and F1 (live 
abalone) 
Divers 
Equipment

Page 9 of 16 
3.3 Surveillance 
Due to the nature of land-based abalone aquaculture facilities internal surveillance will be required 
for those facilities described within Criteria 3 and 4 above, with additional external monitoring 
required in some cases. The objective of AVG surveillance on farms is to demonstrate the absence 
of the viral pathogen. Any surveillance system should comply with Chapter 1.4 of the Aquatic 
Animal Health Code (WOAH, 2024).  
3.3.1 Case definition and recommended diagnostic tests 
The presence of AVG shall be suspected if at least one of the following criteria is met: 
i. 
Presence of high mortality rates associated with clinical signs of AVG as described in 
chapter 2.4.1 of the WOAH Aquatic Manual. 
ii. 
Histopathology (ganglioneuritis) observed in neural tissue sections of a single abalone 
sample. 
iii. 
Positive result by qPCR or conventional PCR on at least one abalone sample. 
The presence of AVG is considered to be confirmed if, in addition to the criteria in the definition of a 
suspect case, one or more of the following criteria are met: 
i. 
Positive result by qPCR on one or more abalone where positive histopathology and/or 
high mortality with clinical signs consistent with AVG also occurs. 
ii. 
Positive result by in-situ hybridisation on neural tissue section. 
iii. 
Positive result by conventional PCR on neural tissue section followed by sequence 
analysis of the amplicon to confirm AbHV nucleic acid sequence. 
The recommended laboratory test for surveillance purposes is quantitative PCR using ORF (open 
read frame) 49 and 66. Ideally the laboratory will be NATA accredited for performing these PCRs. 
Used in parallel these tests have yielded a sensitivity of 86% and specificity of greater than 98% in 
subclinical abalone in Tasmania. Test results are reported based on the presence or absence of a 
characteristic amplification curve, thus a specific cut-off Ct (cycle threshold) value is not assigned. 
Test specificity is discussed further in the “Dealing with Positive results”.  
3.3.2 Internal surveillance requirements  
The recommended surveillance protocol utilises two stages of testing; an initial round of testing to 
demonstrate disease freedom (to 95% confidence) within the existing farm stock and; ongoing 
monitoring of a high risk subgroup (sentinel study population) placed at strategic location/s 
throughout the farm.  
Abalone 
Farm 
Staff/trades people/contractors 
Feed 
Animals/vertebrate pests 
Returned escapees 
Deliberate eg 
theft/sabotage 
Birds

Page 10 of 16 
Testing requirements for abalone entering an approved premises and/or requirements for the 
movement of abalone between premises have been addressed elsewhere. However, it should be 
noted that these will be undertaken according to the principle of only allowing movements from 
premises of equal or higher health accreditation status. If abalone originate from a non-accredited 
facility (including wild stock), quarantine and testing would be required. If abalone originate from an 
AVG AHAP accredited compartment, there should be no additional testing requirement. 
Initial testing of farm stock 
The initial round of surveillance aims to demonstrate freedom within the existing farm population 
and assumes that the premise (abalone farm) is a biosecure compartment and that it has been 
operating according to an approved biosecurity plan for the minimum period1. This minimum period 
should ensure sufficient time for the pathogen, if present, to increase to a detectable level 
throughout the target population. Specific requirements for establishment of biosecure premises 
are covered in 3.2. 
Surveillance should be undertaken using a 2 stage sampling strategy that assumes a tank-level 
prevalence of 10% and animal-level prevalence of 5%. The assumed tank (herd) level value is 
based on observations made during disease events in both Victoria and Tasmania where AVG 
spread quickly and caused significant mortality.  
The animal level prevalence has been assigned according to accepted convention, given that this 
virus is considered highly infectious (WOAH Aquatic Animal Health Code Chapter 1.4). Prevalence 
levels are also supported by surveillance undertaken in Tasmania. 
1: A minimum period being 6 months including one summer. 
Ongoing monitoring of the farm population using active surveillance:  whole 
farm surveillance or sentinel populations 
Active surveillance across the whole farm during a 6-month period 
Active surveillance across the whole farm provides the opportunity to assess the health of 
moribund or dead susceptible abalone from grow out stock selected from across the farm. Thirty2 
or more moribund or recently dead stock should be selected, and their location and date of 
collection recorded for auditing purposes. Samples will be frozen or submitted fresh to the 
laboratory. Submissions may occur at regular intervals eg 10 abalone selected every 2 months or 
close to when the testing is required eg every 6 months. 
The requirement for farms to report a significant disease event (often 1% or more daily mortality) to 
the relevant state government remains.  
2. 
The minimum figure of 30 abalone is based on an assumed prevalence of 10% and also takes into account test 
sensitivity and 95% confidence limits (Cameron A, 2002) Given that any positive result would require further 
investigation a specificity of 1 has been assumed. 
Sentinel populations 
 The sentinel population provides a ready means for intensively monitoring a small sub – 
population of the farm. For the purposes of ongoing farm monitoring, it is assumed that the sentinel 
(test) population is at higher risk of infection through greater exposure to the pathogen and/or is 
made up of individuals of greater susceptibility to expression of disease. The sentinel population(s) 
of abalone will be exposed to discharge water from all farm tanks and will be chosen from abalone 
types (based on age, species and genetic lines) considered most susceptible to disease.

Page 11 of 16 
Placing sentinel populations within farm drains such that they are exposed to discharge water from 
multiple abalone grow-out tanks has a number of benefits: 
• an easily observed representative sub-population that may be monitored daily, 
• immediate testing with negative results of any abalone expressing morbidity or mortality, 
provides continual ongoing support for disease freedom, 
• provides evidence that intake water used by the farm is not carrying virus, and  
• the number of abalone tested, and thus associated costs to producers, is significantly reduced 
without sacrificing overall confidence 
Where more than one drainage system is present, multiple sentinel groups will be required for each 
compartment. It will be the responsibility of the Competent Authority to ensure that a robust 
sampling strategy is undertaken with the appropriate level of confidence in disease detection.   
Farm staff will be required to examine the sentinel population daily and submit any mortalities or 
moribund animals for testing. There would also be a requirement to sample the entire sentinel 
population each 6 months. This would provide confidence of over 95% that the sentinel population 
remains disease free (subject to all test results being negative). Farm staff will also be required to 
maintain accurate records of all abalone removed from the sentinel population for testing purposes 
and make these available during audits by the Competent Authority. 
Dealing with positive results 
Within any surveillance program there is an expectation that false positive test results will occur 
from time to time in the absence of a test with 100% diagnostic specificity. As part of a health 
accreditation program that enables translocation of stock between compartments, a precautionary 
approach must be undertaken and any positive results investigated fully. There are 2 options: 
• 
Where there is sufficient PCR product available, this may be sequenced to confirm 
presence of the virus. As a general rule, positive results with Ct (cycle threshold) values 
below 35 may be confirmed in this manner.  
• 
Where there is insufficient PCR product available (>Ct 35), confirmation of individual 
positive test results is not always possible. In such cases a testing protocol for robustly 
establishing whether a positive result is true or false would be undertaken. If the veracity 
of a positive result is still unclear retesting of the entire farm population to statistically 
significant levels may be required (as described within ‘Initial testing of farm stock’).       
3.2.3 External surveillance requirements  
Biosecurity measures applied in a farm compartment should be appropriate to the level of 
exposure through adjacent populations of abalone.  The disease status of the area in which a 
compartment is sited and thus the exposure of a compartment to disease is rarely static. Therefore, 
ongoing monitoring will help identify any significant change in the level of exposure for identified 
pathways.  
Additional consideration must be undertaken where compartments are located in regions where 
AVG is considered to be endemic in wild abalone populations (Criteria 3). Active surveillance of the 
surrounding marine environment aimed at identifying potential sources of infection associated with 
farm intake water is problematic and provides only intermittent data from an environment without 
adequate biosecurity controls. 
As an alternative, maintenance of the compartment (farm) sentinel population provides ongoing 
support of disease freedom within the compartment population as well as intake water, and is a 
major contributor to demonstrating ongoing disease freedom. However, farm location must also be 
considered in such cases. Distance from wild abalone populations and abalone processors should 
be investigated. The risk of disease transfer to farm compartments via intake water is primarily 
determined by:  
1. 
The presence or absence of clinical disease within adjacent wild abalone or processor 
populations. If passive surveillance systems are in place and clinical disease is not

Page 12 of 16 
observed to be present then risk of transfer to the farm compartment is considered to be 
very low. 
2. 
The distance the compartment is located from the wild abalone or processor populations. 
AVG is considered to remain viable within the water column for approximately 24 hours at 
temperatures commonly found along the south coast of Australia, whilst distance also has 
a significant dilution effect on virus levels. Modelling undertaken in Tasmania has 
suggested that a distance of 5 km is required to reduce levels of viable virus load by <99% 
(Unpublished data). Distances would be less at higher ambient temperatures found on 
mainland Australia, but would also be dependent on water current. The modelling did not 
take into account significant dilution that would occur as distance increased, thus 5km is 
considered to be highly conservative. 
3. 
Whether processors had adequate decontamination processes applied to water outflows, 
and whether these processes were regularly audited. 
When assessing the surrounding environment, the Competent Authority should take into account 
the following potential sources of disease: 
1. Whether the farm is located adjacent to abalone habitat. Where the farm compartment is 
located within 5 km of natural abalone habitat, early detection reporting mechanisms (passive 
surveillance) for mortalities must be in place. This will ensure clinical disease in wild 
populations is identified and such early reporting mechnisms must be developed and 
documented as part of the compartment biosecurity plan. In most cases this reporting may be 
achieved through the use of commercial and recreational fishing communication networks.   
2. If the farm compartment is located within 5 km of an abalone processor, then this processor 
must have an approved and audited decontamination process applied to water outflow. If the 
processor does not have adequate treatment of water outflow, the farm compartment must 
apply appropriate decontamination to water intake. Guidelines for assessing seawater 
decontamination processes are available from the Tasmanian State government. 
Ongoing monitoring of the abalone populations external to the farm compartment will therefore be 
provided by: 
• 
Sentinel abalone (as established for internal surveillance) 
• 
External monitoring of the surrounding area proportionate to risk 
• 
Investigation of any abalone found to be dead or diseased through the external monitoring 
system or by other means. 
1. Definition of terms used (sourced from WOAH Aquatic Animal Health Code, 
unless otherwise indicated) 
Basic biosecurity conditions – means a set of conditions applying to AVG in a compartment 
required to ensure adequate disease security, such as: 
a. 
the disease, including suspicion of the disease, is compulsorily notifiable to the 
Competent Authority (CA); and 
b. 
an early detection system is in place within the zone; and 
c. 
import requirements to prevent the introduction of disease into the zone, as outlined in 
the WOAH Aquatic Code, are in place. 
Biosecurity plan - Biosecurity plan means a plan that identifies potential pathways for the 
introduction and spread of disease in a zone or compartment, and describes the measures which 
are being or will be applied to mitigate the disease risks, if applicable, in accordance with the 
recommendations in the WOAH Aquatic Code. 
Compartment – one or more aquaculture establishments under a common biosecurity 
management system containing an abalone population with a distinct health status with respect to 
AVG for which sanitary measures are applied and basic biosecurity conditions are met for the 
purposes of trade or stock movement. Such compartments must be clearly documented and 
approved by the Competent Authority.

Page 13 of 16 
The compartment boundary includes all of the licenced land-based site including all operational 
components from the point where water enters the site through the inlet pipe and exits the site 
through the outlet pipe. This includes settlement ponds, hatcheries and other infrastructure within 
the boundary.  In addition to the physical boundaries described, premises may be required to 
establish a ‘monitored area’ around the water intake for monitoring purposes. These are the 
boundaries of the site and are considered the responsibility of the farm. Where farms are not able 
to exclude or inactivate pathogens from intake water they will need to demonstrate that the farms 
water is drawn from an area of extremely low risk to the satisfaction of the requirements of the 
Competent Authority. (see Article 4.2.3 WOAH Aquatic Code).  
Competent Authority (CA) –means the Veterinary Authority or other relevant Governmental 
Authority having the responsibility and competence for ensuring or supervising the implementation 
of animal health measures or veterinary health certification. This may include State, Territory or 
Commonwealth governments and their departments.  
Infected abalone - as defined by the WOAH for both suspect and confirmed cases (see below 
from Chapter 2.4.1 Manual of Diagnostic Tests for Aquatic Animals 2012). 
Minimum period- the period that an approved biosecurity plan must be established before, such to 
surveillance requirements, a compartment may be considered free of AVG. For the purposes of 
this document the minimum period for AVG accreditation is considered to be 6 months which also 
includes a summer period. 
Sentinel - being an individual or part of a population potentially susceptible to an infection or 
infestation that is being monitored for the appearance or recurrence of the causative pathogen or 
parasite (Merriam-Webster Medical Dictionary) 
Surveillance - means a systematic series of investigations from a test population considered to be 
representative of the target population of aquatic animals to detect the occurrence of disease for 
control purposes, and which may involve testing samples of a population. 
Zone –means a portion of one or more states comprising: 
a. 
an entire water catchment from the source of a waterway to the estuary or lake, or 
b. 
more than one water catchment, or 
c. 
part of a water catchment from the source of a waterway to a barrier that prevents the 
introduction of a specific disease or diseases, or 
d. 
part of a coastal area with a precise geographical delimitation, or 
e. 
an estuary with a precise geographical delimitation, 
that consists of a contiguous hydrological system with a distinct health status with respect 
to a specific disease or diseases. The zones must be clearly documented (e.g. by a map 
or other precise locators such as GPS coordinates) by the Competent Authority(ies).

Page 14 of 16 
Appendix 1: Epidemiological assumptions  
Disease 
Abalone viral ganglioneuritis (AVG) 
Pathogen 
Abalone herpes virus   
Host range in 
Australia 
Assumed to be all Haliotis spp., demonstrated susceptibility in H. rubra, H. 
laevigata, crosses of these two species, and H. roei. Susceptibility testing of other 
abalone species present in Australia has not been undertaken at this time, but it 
must be assumed that all Haliotis species are susceptible.  
Known current 
or historical 
distribution in 
wild 
populations in 
Australia 
Tasmania, Victoria, Sth Australia 
Case definition 
(clinical) 
As provided by WOAH  
Recommended 
surveillance 
test 
Quantitative PCR using ORF (open read frame) 49 and 66. Using both tests in 
assumes sensitivity of 86% for surveillance purposes. A test specificity of 1.0 for 
surveillance purposes is assumed where all positive results are investigated 
further.    
Transmission  
Horizontal transmission demonstrated. Vertical transmission assumed but not 
demonstrated. Distance between farms, processors and wild populations is 
considered to be a significant factor 
Incubation 
period 
5 days  
Survival period 
in water 
Survival of the virus outside of the host has been shown to be temperature 
dependent, with viability declining as temperature increases. Recent work 
demonstrated that infectivity declined to 37.5% after 3 days at 15 degrees 
Celsius and 0% by five days at the same temperature. 
Infective 
distance in 
open waters 
Dependent on water flow, temperature and vector (e.g. host mucus, predation), 
but conservative distances should be assumed: 
5 km observation zone (passive surveillance)

Page 15 of 16 
Appendix 2: Example of surveillance for an approved farm 
compartment (for guidance purposes only) 
Specific conditions 
An example list of required conditions for monitoring of disease within accredited premises is 
outlined below: 
i. 
the abalone farm must submit samples to a government laboratory to detect infection using a 2-stage 
sampling procedure to achieve a 95% confidence level of detecting infection when tested using 
agreed qPCR procedures;   
ii. 
the abalone farm must also establish and maintain a sentinel population of 30 or more susceptible 
abalone within an area of the farm that receives discharge water from all tanks holding live abalone 
on the farm. Where the sentinel abalone population cannot be placed in a single common area to 
receive discharge from all tanks, multiple sentinel abalone populations must be used; and  
iii. The abalone farm has the option of providing sentinels from across the farm that are moribund or 
recently dead to the laboratory in a timely manner for PCR testing. 
iv. the abalone farm staff must check each sentinel population daily and submit any moribund abalone 
to a government laboratory to detect infection with all abalone submitted testing negative for AVG. 
The abalone farm must replace any moribund abalone in order to maintain a sentinel population of 
30 or more; and    
v. Alternatively, where animals are selected from the whole farm it is assumed that regular checking of 
mortalities is occurring. 
vi. every six months (or more frequently as required) the abalone farm must submit all abalone within 
the sentinel population/whole farm to a government laboratory to detect infection with all abalone 
testing negative for AVG. Where a sentinel populaiton is used, it must be immediately replaced by 
an equivalent population of abalone that is monitored for the next 6-month period; and 
vii. the abalone farm must maintain accurate records of all abalone removed from the sentinel population 
or whole farm for testing purposes and provide these records for examination during audits of 
compliance. Audits of farm records, biosecurity and test results, together with farm inspections, must 
be undertaken by an approved third party annually.

Page 16 of 16 
Appendix 3: Useful references  
• Bondad-Reantaso M.G., McGladdery S.E., East I. and Subasinghe R.P. (eds.) (2001) ‘Asia 
Diagnostic Guide to Aquatic Animal Diseases. FAO Fisheries Technical Paper No. 402, 
Supplement 2. Rome, FAO. 2001. 
• 
Cameron A (2004) ‘Principles for the design and conduct of surveys to show presence or 
absence of infectious disease in aquatic animals.’ National Aquatic Animal Health Technical 
Woking Group – Policy Document, May 2004. 
• 
Cameron A (2002) ‘Survey Toolbox for aquatic animal diseases. A practical manual and 
software package.’ ACIAR Monograph No. 94. 
• 
Corbeil S., Colling A., Williams L., Wong F., Savin K., Warner S., Murdoch B., Cogan N., 
Sawbridge T., Fegan M., Mohammad I., Sunarto A., Handlinger J., Pyecroft S., Douglas M., 
Chang P. and Crane M. (2010) ‘Development and validation of Taqman PCR for Australian 
abalone herpes-like virus’ Diseases of Aquatic Organisms, Vol 92, 1-10. 
• 
Corbeil S, Williams L, Warner S, Fegan M, Moody N, IIham M, Ellard K, Caraguel C, Deveney 
M, Cowley J, and Crane M (2014) FRDC Aquatic Animal Health Subprogram: 
Characterisation of abalone herpes-like virus infections in abalone. FRDC Project No. 
2009/032, 2014.  
• 
Corbeil S.et al (in progress). Determination of susceptibility of various abalone species and 
populations to the various known AbHV genotypes. FRDC Milestone Report No. 6 2013/001 
• 
Jones B (2005) ‘Aquatic Animal Health Subprogram: Technical Guidelines for the 
Translocation of Live Aquatic Animals (with reference to barramundi nodavirus)’ FRDC Report 
2005/640.  
• 
Jones B and Stephens F (2006) ‘Aquatic Animal Health Subprogram: Development of a 
National Translocation Policy using Abalone and Prawns as Templates for Other Aquatic 
Species. FRDC Report 2004/080.  
• 
WOAH (2024) ‘Aquatic Animal Health Code’ 2024 Edition, World Organisation for Animal 
Health 
• 
Rodgers C.J., Mohan C.V. and Peeler E. J. (2011) ‘The spread of pathogens through trade in 
aquatic animals and their products’, Rev. Sci. Tech. Off. Int. Epiz., 2011, 30(1), 241-256.  
• 
Zepeda C., Jones J.B. and Zagmutt F.J (2008) ‘Compartmentalisation in aquaculture 
production systems’, Rev. Sci. Off. Int. Epiz., 2008, 27(1), 229-241.