The Animal Health Committee (AHC) delivers strategic policy, technical, and regulatory advice and
national leadership on animal health and biosecurity matters. It is responsible for delivering on
national priority reform areas and overseeing the development and implementation of animal health
strategies and standards. AHC is a sectoral committee of the National Biosecurity Committee (NBC).
AHC’s principal objective is to maintain or improve animal health outcomes and manage animal
AHC also facilitates trade through national leadership, strategic direction and collaboration with
Develop science-based and nationally consistent policy on animal health issues relevant and
Provide advice on animal health to NBC, the veterinary and animal health community, and the
Provide leadership in developing and implementing veterinary policy on animal health issues
Facilitate cooperation and collaboration across agencies and between industry and government.
Provide expert advice on animal health to inform government policy and priorities.
Implement nationally coordinated activities to strengthen animal health and biosecurity systems.
Australia enjoys a high level of food quality and a strong reputation for animal health among
agricultural trading partners. AHC's efforts in surveillance, monitoring, and reporting systems help

substantiate claims of freedom from certain animal diseases, ensuring that Australia can detect,
Committee members include the chief veterinary officers (CVOs) of the Commonwealth, states and
territories, along with representatives from CSIRO’s Australian Centre for Disease Preparedness
Observers include representatives from Animal Health Australia, Wildlife Health Australia, and the
New Zealand Ministry for Primary Industries. Observers are invited by the AHC Chair to participate at
committee meetings in an advisory or consultative capacity, and do not have voting rights.
AHC meets face-to-face twice each year in a different state or territory each time. AHC members also
meet regularly by videoconference to discuss issues of national importance and consider matters out of
The AHC co-chairs consist of a permanent chair – the ACVO – and a rotating co-chair. The co-chair
position rotates annually among jurisdictional representatives, ensuring a diverse leadership. AHC
AHC regularly engages with national terrestrial and aquatic industry members and veterinary services
to ensure a collaborative approach to national animal health. As part of this engagement AHC holds two

combined stakeholder sessions each year that are integrated into the face-to-face meetings as well as
several sector specific sessions. These sessions provide an opportunity for animal health stakeholders to
meet directly with AHC members to build strong relationships and ensure collective understanding of
AHC publishes the AHC Communique with information on topics considered at face-to-face meetings.
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/animal/health/committees/ahc