Getting out to see all that Australia has to offer is a fantastic opportunity to explore and learn more about our culture and where we live. However, it is also an opportunity for pests, diseases and weeds to travel with you as you visit different parts of the country.
There are restrictions on what you can carry with you as you cross state and other quarantine borders within Australia. Following the rules around moving certain items will help to minimise the biosecurity risk to our valuable agricultural industries, local jobs and unique environment.
Failure to check what you are carrying can have serious consequences for you.
Travellers face on-the-spot fines for taking prohibited items across borders.
Know what you can take interstate
Most Australians are aware that there are rules about what you can and cannot bring back into the country when you travel overseas, but not everyone realises that there are similar rules in place for moving between states.
It’s always good to check any restrictions that might apply to your trip before you leave.
Checking will avoid the possibility of having to dispose of fruit, vegetables and honey at the border or as you move though other quarantine zones.
You can find out what these restrictions are by downloading a copy of Australian Interstate Quarantine: A traveller’s guide or by phoning 1800 084 881 during business hours from Monday to Friday.
Don’t take the chance, leave your plants
Moving house is always a big job. It’s an even bigger job when the house you are moving to is in another state or territory.
There are restrictions on those plants and produce from the orchard and vegetable garden you can move between states, but also on household potted plants (including fruit trees) and some pet animals.
Soil can carry harmful pests and diseases so most states do not allow pot plants to be moved. Pests and diseases can also be carried on the leaves of some plants. If the plant is special to you, there may be a treatment option, however this will come at a cost. It’s probably cheaper to just buy new plants when you reach your destination.
Some states have restrictions on animals that can be kept as pets as well. Call 1800 084 881 to learn more about what can and can’t be moved.
If you’re unsure, show it the (bin) door
If you arrive at a border where fruit or vegetables cannot be taken across, you either need to eat it on the spot or dispose of it responsibly.
You will find quarantine bins at domestic airports, ferry terminals and state and quarantine zone borders. If you’re carrying any restricted products – or you think you might be – you need to dispose of them then and there. By doing so, you can be confident you’re not giving a hitchhiking pest or disease a free trip into another state.