More and more Australians are leaving the city to enjoy living on a few acres of land, keeping animals and growing some of their own fruit and vegetables.
It is important, not just for hobby and commercial farmers but for everyone in the community, that all landholders take their biosecurity responsibilities seriously.
Look after your animals' health
Regardless of whether you own a large or small property, you are responsible for keeping your animals free from pests and diseases. Good biosecurity practices can help prevent pests and diseases establishing on your property and spreading to neighbouring properties.
Simple things you can do to care for your animals:
- provide clean water and sufficient food
- regularly clean their living area
- provide proper grooming
- get vet checks
- prevent, control and promptly treat injuries, illnesses and diseases
- if keeping herd animals (such as alpacas), be sure to have more than one.
Have a biosecurity plan in place
If you’re a property owner, it is important that you have a biosecurity plan in place to protect your property from the entry and spread of pests, diseases and weeds.
Producers play a key role in protecting Australian plant and livestock industries from pests and diseases by implementing sound on-farm biosecurity measures.
A biosecurity plan is a document (or range of documents) that outlines all of the biosecurity activities property owners work through to reduce the risks of pest and disease entry or spread.
Managing biosecurity is the responsibility of the property owner, and every person visiting or working on the property.
Be on the lookout for feral animals, pests and weeds
Across Australia, there are many pest animals that have been introduced, are native or have turned into pests that cause significant social, environmental and economic impacts. Examples of pest animals include rabbits, wild dogs, feral cats, feral pigs, foxes and toads.
Pests, diseases and weeds can also spread from one part of Australia to another through the movement of plants, plant products or other items that have been in contact with soil.
Pest management is primarily the responsibility of the states and territories. With the help of surveillance, new technologies (for example FeralScan) and through cooperation from property owners, we can improve the impact of these invasive animals.
If a pest or disease becomes established on your land, it can increase costs, reduce productivity or for larger commercial farms mean loss of access to international markets.