Australia's terrestrial and aquatic animal health management policies and programs are coordinated
nationally by a series of government committees.
The committees range from scientific (technical/operational) committees devoted to animal health up
to a forum at ministerial level where a part of its work addresses animal health issues that require high-
level policy endorsement.
Committees
National Biosecurity Committee (NBC)
The NBC was established in July 2008 to provide strategic leadership in managing national approaches
to emerging and ongoing biosecurity policy issues across jurisdictions and sectors, and to provide
advice to Agricultural Senior Officials Committee and Agricultural Ministers Forum. The NBC takes an
overarching, cross-sectoral approach to national biosecurity policy, and works collaboratively to achieve
national policy objectives for biosecurity in Australia.
All biosecurity issues (including environmental, animal and plant biosecurity issues) are considered by
the NBC with a view to resolution or the development of advice to the Agricultural Senior Officials
Committee and the Agricultural Ministers Forum as appropriate.
The NBC meets twice yearly in February and August.
For further information contact the NBC Secretariat.
Animal Health Committee (AHC)
AHC is a sub-committee of the NBC. The chief veterinary officers (CVOs) of Australia and of the states
and territories, along with representatives from CSIRO, Animal Health Australia, and the New Zealand
Ministry for Primary Industries form the committee.
AHC's primary purpose is to develop science-based and nationally consistent policy on animal health
issues, and to provide advice as necessary on animal health to NBC.
The committee drives and manages high level strategic policy development, operational strategies and
standards for government in animal health, domestic quarantine, animal welfare and veterinary public
health. It also provides a mechanism to enable national consultation and to facilitate a nationally
consistent government approach to animal health and welfare issues of concern to government and
other stakeholders. Read more about AHC.
Sub–Committee on Aquatic Animal Health (SCAAH) is an advisory committee to the Animal Health
Committee (AHC). SCAAH provides scientific and technical advice to AHC on aquatic animal health
issues, including national policy and program development. SCAAH considers issues including those
that affect the wild capture and recreational fishing industries, aquaculture industries and the
ornamental fish industry. SCAAH comprises representation from the Australian, state and Northern

Territory and New Zealand governments, the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research
Organisation Australian Animal Health Laboratory (CSIRO AAHL) and Australian universities. SCAAH
is chaired by a member of AHC.
The Consultative Committee on Emergency Animal Diseases (CCEAD) meets when required to
coordinate the national response to emergency animal disease incidents.
The National Emergency Animal Disease Management Group (NMG) is the decision-making body and
reviews the advice given by CCEAD relating to emergency disease response policy and funding
mechanisms. It comprises of the Chief Executive Officers of state and territory and Australian
Government departments of agriculture (or equivalents), as well as industry representatives.
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/animal/health/committees