Australia’s animal health laboratories seek to sustain and improve the quality of terrestrial and aquatic
animal health to assure domestic and international market access through the development and
application of best practice to veterinary laboratory services.
The Animal Health Committee (AHC) is supported by a task group that reports to the National
Biosecurity Committee (NBC) on national animal health laboratory standards and other quality
assurance related functions. The task group meets on an ‘as-needs’ basis and its membership includes:
the state and territory animal health laboratories
the Australian Centre for Disease Preparedness (ACDP)
Australian Government Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry
Animal Health Australia (observer)
the New Zealand Ministry for Primary Industries.
A member of the AHC chairs the group.
The task group acts as a forum for national coordination on issues such as:
quality assurance
new test evaluation and development, including an up-to-date test register standard diagnostic
procedures
laboratory emergency animal disease (EAD) preparedness and response
a national reference laboratory system
technical and policy advice relating to diagnostics, biosecurity and biosafety and related training
opportunities
laboratory disease surveillance and the National Animal Health Information System (NAHIS).
ACDP (formerly known as the Australian Animal Health Laboratory) is a Commonwealth Scientific and
Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) national facility based in Geelong, Victoria and one of the six
major high-containment animal health laboratories in the world. ACDP is designed for EAD diagnosis
and research. Its diagnostic services are primarily funded by the department, including the following
activities:
providing diagnosis of and emergency response to EADs, including relevant research and
surveillance works
providing technical and scientific advice on EADs
providing education and training in EAD recognition and diagnosis for animal health workers
serving as an World Organisation for Animal Health (WOAH) reference centre for bluetongue,
avian influenza, Newcastle disease, Hendra and Nipah virus diseases, yellowhead disease,
epizootic haematopoietic necrosis, ranavirus infection, abalone herpes-like virus disease, new and
emerging diseases and laboratory capacity building, a Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations (FAO) reference laboratory for biological risk management, and a national
reference laboratory for brucellosis and rabies.
maintaining and improving microbiological and physical security of the containment facility.
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
•

In addition to ACDP, the six central state or territory government laboratories and various private and
university animal health laboratories support the national animal health system.
Government and major private animal health laboratories in Australia are accredited to relevant
international standards (i.e. ISO/IEC 17025:2005) through the National Association of Testing
Authorities (NATA), which is a member of the International Laboratory Accreditation Cooperation
(ILAC) and represents Australia in ILAC activities. Accreditation through NATA provides an important
mechanism for formal recognition to competent testing services, thus improving the efficiency and
competitiveness of Australian animal industries in international and national markets.
AHC, through its laboratory task group, maintains a comprehensive series of disease-based Australian
and New Zealand Standard Diagnostic Procedures (ANZSDPs) and publishes revisions and new titles as
required, in line with WOAH recommended procedures with requirements specific to Australian
situations included.
The Australian National Quality Assurance Program (ANQAP) and ACDP facilitates is accredited to
relevant international standards (i.e. ISO/IEC 17043) and provides national and international inter-
laboratory proficiency testing (PT) programs for a range of important animal diseases.
These PT programs cover assays used for quarantine, export certification and national disease control,
including haematology, biochemistry, parasitology, histopathology, serology, molecular (genetic)
detection, and bacteriology.
The WOAH Focal Point for Veterinary Laboratories in Australia is Dr William Wong, who is responsible
for co-ordinating and reporting veterinary laboratory issues to the WOAH through the Chief Veterinary
Officer as the Australian WOAH Delegate. Should you wish to contact him, please email WOAH
Australia.
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/animal/health/system/lab-network