Key facts
Effective national surveillance and control of animal diseases in Australia requires cooperative
partnerships among the government agencies, organisations, commercial companies and
individuals who are involved in the animal industries.
Australia’s animal health system includes all organisations, government agencies, commercial
companies, universities and individuals who are involved in the livestock production chain. 
Wildlife Health Australia complements livestock health activities and provides Australia’s
framework for national management of the health and diseases of wildlife (both native and feral
animals).
Australia is a federation of states and territories governed by an Australian Government, six state
governments and two territory governments. The Australian Constitution sets out the powers of
the Australian Government. The state and territory governments have exclusive authority in areas
that do not come within the authority of the Australian Government.
The Australian Government advises on and coordinates animal health policy at a national level. It
is responsible for international animal health matters, including quarantine, export certification
and trade, as well as disease reporting to the World Organisation for Animal Health (WOAH).
Under the Australian constitution, the individual state and territory governments are responsible
for animal health matters within their boundaries. Such matters include disease surveillance and
control, chemical residues in animal products, livestock identification and traceability, and
animal welfare.
Australian governments have a close association with livestock industries. This allows
consultation between government and industry to determine national animal health priorities.
The livestock industries participate in policy development, support targeted animal health
activities and contribute to emergency responses.
Government-run veterinary services in Australia involve officers from the Australian
Government, state and territory governments, and local government. A system of consultative
committees ensures that these three levels of government work together to serve the overall
interest of Australia. In addition, the interests of government and industry are served through 
Animal Health Australia, a public company whose members include the Australian Government,
state and territory government, the peak national councils of Australia’s livestock industries and
various key research, veterinary and educational organisations.
Additionally, Australia’s animal health laboratories, which comprises the state/territory
government laboratories, and the Australian Animal Health Laboratory at Geelong, plays a
critical role in providing diagnostic, surveillance and research services to support nationwide
veterinary activities and the health and productivity of Australia’s livestock industries.
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
•

[expand all]
Australian Government responsibilities
The Australian Government is responsible for quarantine and international animal health matters,
including disease reporting, export certification and trade negotiation. It also coordinates and provides
advice on national policy on animal health and welfare. In some circumstances, it provides financial
assistance for national disease control programs.
The animal health role of the Australian Government is delivered through the Biosecurity Animal
Division working in conjunction with other areas of the Australian Government Department of
Agriculture. Diagnostic services, exotic and emergency disease support, and independent scientific
advice are provided by the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO).
The Australian Government is the largest single employer of veterinarians in Australia because of the
large number employed in the meat inspection service. It is therefore able to provide an important
reserve force to the states and territories in the event of any major exotic animal disease incursion.
The Australian Chief Veterinary Officer
The Office of the Chief Veterinary Officer (OCVO) provides national leadership and direction on priority
policy issues relating to animal health and welfare in Australia.
The Australian Chief Veterinary Officer (ACVO) is Australia’s principal representative on animal health
matters nationally and internationally, and is Australia’s permanent representative to the World
Organization for Animal Health (OIE). As the international reference point on animal health, the OCVO
coordinates animal health intelligence gathering, Australia’s commitments to OIE, and communication
with other international agencies dealing with animal health and welfare.
Quarantine and biosecurity
The Department of Agriculture’s quarantine and biosecurity functions within the Animal Division work
in conjunction with other areas of the department to deliver effective, risk-based services across the
biosecurity continuum. This structure reflects a national approach to biosecurity, simplifies domestic
and international communications, and improves responsiveness.
The following divisions and branches are responsible for animal health, biosecurity policy, export
health certification, and the regulation of importation of animals and plants, their genetic material and
their products:
Biosecurity Animal Division (Animal Health Policy, Animal & Biological Import Assessments,
Animal Biosecurity, Office of the Chief Veterinary Officer)
Exports division (Export Standards, Meat Exports, Live Animal Exports, Residues and Food).
• 
•

Their veterinary functions include responsibility for:
veterinary public health inspection of meat through a national inspection service
animal quarantine involving imports of live animals and animal products
health certification of exports of live animals and animal reproductive material.
Although the Australian Government has responsibility for formulating policy and ultimate
responsibility for quarantine under the Australian Constitution, the states and territories may act as
operational field agents of the Commonwealth to assist the delivery of quarantine and export
certification services. Under the provisions of the Accreditation Program for Australian Veterinarians,
accredited veterinarians also play an important role in delivery of export certification services.
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation
CSIRO website.
State and territory government responsibilities
Under the Australian Constitution, state and territory governments have legislative responsibility
for animal health services within their respective borders.
State and territory animal health services administer relevant acts and regulations involved with
livestock identification and movement (within and between states and territories), disease
surveillance, diagnosis, reporting (notifiable animal diseases and reportable aquatic animal
diseases) and control, chemical residues and other programs.
Each state and territory is further subdivided into veterinary regions or divisions that are under
the control of a government veterinary officer. Each region or division is further subdivided into
animal health districts which are administered by inspectors who may be veterinarians or
qualified animal technicians.
Veterinary officers located in regions supervise inspectors and administer the application of
relevant state and territory acts and regulations. They also maintain records of the animal health
status on farms in their region that assist in the reliable certification of animals moving within
Australia and overseas.
The states and territories also have government animal health laboratories that provide a disease
diagnosis and investigation service and which may also undertake applied research.
National Biosecurity Committee
The National Biosecurity Committee (NBC) was established in July 2008 to provide strategic leadership
in managing national approaches to emerging and ongoing biosecurity policy issues across jurisdictions
and sectors, and to provide advice to the then Primary Industries Standing Committee (PISC) and
Standing Council on Primary Industries (SCoPI). The NBC takes an overarching, cross-sectoral
approach to national biosecurity policy, and works collaboratively to achieve national policy objectives
for biosecurity in Australia.
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
•

All biosecurity issues (including environmental, animal and plant biosecurity issues) are considered by
the NBC with a view to resolution or the development of advice to the Agricultural Senior Officials
Committee (formerly PISC) and the Agricultural Ministers Forum (formerly SCoPI) as appropriate.
The NBC meets twice yearly in February and August. For further information contact the NBC
Secretariat.
Animal Health Committee (AHC)
Several committees advise NBC on specialist issues and in turn have their own infrastructure of
subcommittees, time-limited task groups and expert panels that focus on particular areas within each
committee’s terms of reference.
Committee members of AHC include the chief veterinary officers (CVOs) of Australia and of the states
and territories, and representatives from CSIRO, the Department of Agriculture, and the Department of
Environment. There are also observers from Animal Health Australia, Wildlife Health Australia, and
the New Zealand Ministry for Primary Industries.
AHC's primary purpose is to develop science-based and nationally consistent policy on animal health
issues, and to provide advice as necessary on animal health to NBC. In so doing, AHC provides
leadership in developing and implementing policy, programs, operational strategies and standards for
government in the areas of animal health, domestic quarantine, animal welfare and veterinary public
health.
AHC conducts its business in close conjunction with Animal Health Australia, providing technical and
policy advice and consulting over program development.
AHC meets face-to-face twice a year, and the meetings are held in a different state each time. The
position of the chair of the committee is rotated annually between the CVOs.
AHC publishes a newsletter, Vetcommunique, which provides information on topics that they have
considered in their face-to-face meetings.
Sub-committee on Aquatic Animal Health
The Sub-committee on Aquatic Animal Health (SCAAH) provides scientific and technical advice to AHC
on aquatic animal health issues, including national policy and program development. SCAAH considers
issues including those that affect the wild capture and recreational fishing industries, aquaculture
industries and the ornamental fish industry.
SCAAH comprises representation from the Australian, state and Northern Territory and New Zealand
governments, the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation Australian Animal
Health Laboratory (CSIRO AAHL) and Australian universities. SCAAH is chaired by a member of AHC.
For more information visit the department’s Aquatic Animal Health web pages.
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/animal/health/system