Delivering
Ag2030
MAY 2021
Department of Agriculture,
Water and the Environment

ii
Delivering Ag2030
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
In 2018 when Australia’s agriculture industry, led by the National Farmers’ 
Federation, set the goal of boosting farm gate output to $100 billion by 2030, 
perhaps some of the challenges along the road were foreseeable. The challenges 
farmers have always faced – of drought, flood and fire – have continued to test us 
and the industry has more than risen to these challenges.
The global COVID-19 pandemic however, was an unforeseeable black swan event 
that no one could have anticipated. It took the industry and broader Australian 
community by surprise, with unprecedented effects on every Australian’s way of 
life and our economy.
It has been incredible to see Australia’s agriculture industry – every farmer, 
fisher, forester and participant across the supply chains that make up the 
1.6 million jobs involved in agriculture – respond with such determination and 
resilience since the pandemic began. The industry simply got on with the job, 
continuing to put food on Australian tables and delivering world-class produce 
to our trading partners overseas.
In so many ways, agriculture has been a shining light of the Australian economy since the COVID-19 
pandemic began.
The figures tell the tale – according to projections, our agricultural industry will be worth $71.2 billion 
in 2020–21, up from $66.5 billion in 2019–20. The 2020–21 production value includes $66.0 billion in 
farm-gate output alone, along with a $5.3 billion contribution from our fishing and forestry sectors. 
In the 2020 calendar year employment in agriculture also grew, signaling its strength as a reliable 
employer, particularly in rural and regional Australia. We have supported farming families and bolstered 
communities by providing support to recover from disaster and financial hardship, and to keep and create 
jobs during the COVID-19 pandemic. We put measures in place to help businesses access labour, even when 
state and national borders were closed. 
Since industry launched its 2030 goal, the Australian Government has been laying the foundations and 
frameworks for farmers, fishers and foresters to take advantage of opportunities and be rewarded for 
their efforts. The government’s work across the 7 themes of Delivering Ag2030 continue to deliver better 
outcomes for farmers, and the measures announced through the recent 2021–22 Budget are no exception.
Foreword

iii
Delivering Ag2030
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
The specific measures and commitments outlined in this May 2021 edition of Delivering Ag2030 build 
on the industry’s successes and continue to lay the foundations for agriculture to grow into the future. 
The government is funding projects and programs that expand trade opportunities; further strengthen 
our biosecurity systems; reward farmers for the stewardship of their land; improve the competitiveness, 
resilience and innovative capacity of the industry; deliver the infrastructure our farmers and rural 
businesses need; and invest in our most precious asset – our people. These measures, along with broader 
support for businesses such as the extension of the instant asset write-off, will deliver significant 
dividends for the agricultural industry going forward.
The industry’s goal to reach $100 billion by 2030 is ambitious, and success in reaching it will require 
significant increases in the rate of industry growth. This will depend on many factors – some of which 
are outside our control – but industry has shown over the last 12 months that it is up to the task and will 
remain stoic in the face of the challenges this decade is sure to keep serving up.
The Australian Government will continue to back the industry to achieve its vision – boosting 
productivity, resilience, sustainability and profitability where we can, and getting out of the way where 
we need to.
Reaching this goal would see all Australians benefit from a stronger economy, with higher employment 
and thriving rural and regional communities. Our food supply would be even more secure, with enough 
produce to keep all Australians fed many times over.
Agriculture, already one of Australia’s greatest assets, has reached new highs in 2021 and I am confident 
that it will continue to thrive as a key pillar of our nation’s economy and society into the future.
The Hon. David Littleproud MP 
Minister for Agriculture, Drought and Emergency Management

1
Delivering Ag2030
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
Ag2030 
The Australian Government is supporting the 
agriculture industry to reach its goal of $100 billion 
in production by 2030 (Ag2030).
We have already taken significant action to help 
industry reach this goal at community, industry and 
national levels. We have reformed policy settings and 
frameworks, directed substantial funding to new 
initiatives to better support industry, and listened to 
what industry has told us it needs. We are committed 
to putting in place the right foundations for industry 
to thrive, and will continue to look at areas where more 
needs to be done.
The Australian agriculture 
industry 
The agriculture industry is a strong contributor 
to the Australian economy. The agriculture industry – 
the farming, fishing and forestry sectors – is forecast 
to be valued at $71.2 billion in 2020–21, made up of 
$66.0 billion in farm gate value and $5.3 billion from 
the fishery and forestry sectors. It is one of the only 
industries to grow in value despite the challenges 
of 2020, including bushfires, drought, COVID-19 and 
global trade disruptions.
The industry provides significant employment 
opportunities across regional and rural Australia 
both directly and indirectly. Over 334,000 people 
are employed in Australian agriculture and a 
further 243,000 employed in the food and beverage 
manufacturing sector. The whole Australian 
agriculture supply chain employs 1.6 million people.
Around 70% of Australia’s agricultural produce is 
exported, providing a reliable source of food and 
fibre to our trading partners. Of the food consumed 
domestically, over 90% is produced in Australia, 
ensuring our food security.
Our agriculture industry feeds demand both at home 
and abroad helping agricultural businesses stay strong. 
With benefits flowing both ways, continued growth of 
the industry will benefit all Australians.
Despite consistent growth, reaching $100 billion by 
2030 remains a highly ambitious goal. For the farming 
sector alone to reach $100 billion, the annual growth 
rate will need to more than double, which will only 
be possible if industry is successful in harnessing 
emerging opportunities and increasing efficiencies.
The challenge 
Industry faces serious challenges in achieving the 
goal. While many challenges are out of the control 
of industry, they are known challenges that, in most 
cases, industry has faced in the past.
With 72% (in 2019–20) of Australian export revenue 
earned in Asia, capitalising on trade and export 
opportunities is going to be a major driver in delivering 
on the $100 billion goal. 
However, global market conditions are expected to 
make our agricultural exports more vulnerable to 
decreases in world prices in the future.
Agricultural exports have been significantly impacted 
by global trade disruptions. Markets, supply chains and 
our trade relationships have become, and will continue 
to be, more complex. They will require Australia to 
continue to be proactive in our responses.
There are domestic challenges too. Although farmers 
have long been resilient against extreme conditions, 
we are likely to experience more frequent and severe 
droughts in the years ahead. We also need to maintain 
our essential pest and disease free status in the 
face of rising global biosecurity threats, including in 
our region.
Introduction

2
Delivering Ag2030
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
Agriculture Industry at a Glance
$71.2b
in estimated value 
in 2020–21
Top five:
1.6m 
people are employed 
across the Australian 
agriculture supply chain
$2.94b
Fishery sector
$2.35b
Forestry sector
$13.8b 
Cattle
Over 90% 
of the daily food consumed in Australia 
is made by Australian farmers
Australian farmers  
produce enough food for 
80 million people
$8.5b 
Wheat
334k 
people are employed in 
the agriculture sector
243k 
people are employed in 
the food and beverage 
manufacturing sectors
$4.2b 
Milk
$4.7b 
Sheep
$6.1b 
Fruit & nuts

3
Delivering Ag2030
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
Delivering Ag2030
While the Ag2030 goal is an industry goal and many 
of the challenges faced are for industry to overcome, 
it will not be achieved unless the government puts in 
place the right foundations for industry to harness 
emerging opportunities and increase efficiencies.
The government has 7 themes it is focusing on to 
support industry to reach its goal:
	Î
Trade and Exports: We are strengthening 
agricultural ties with major and emerging export 
markets, and we are making it easier to do 
business. This will deliver new trade and market 
access for producers, while also reducing red tape.
	Î
Biosecurity: We are safeguarding Australia 
from exotic pests and diseases and maintaining 
Australia’s clean and green reputation, which is 
critical to our market access and means lower costs 
for our producers.
	Î
Stewardship: We are ensuring Australian farmers 
are rewarded for their stewardship of land 
and water.
	Î
Supply Chains: We are backing fair, strong and 
resilient supply chains and putting in place the 
frameworks so everyone is treated fairly and pays 
their share.
	Î
Water and Infrastructure: We are supporting 
Australian farmers and rural and regional 
communities with infrastructure when and where 
it is needed.
	Î
Innovation and Research: We are providing 
the right conditions to modernise Australia’s 
agricultural innovation system, which will drive 
improvements in collaboration, commercialisation 
and uptake to grow agricultural productivity 
and competitiveness.
	Î
Human Capital: We are making sure people and 
their communities, right across the agriculture 
industry and supply chain, have the support, 
infrastructure and skills to do their jobs.
The government’s commitment to helping industry 
reach its goal by 2030 means we need to set up 
agriculture, and the broader Australian economy, 
to address these challenges and put in place a 
long-term strategy to diversify export destinations, 
improve supply chains and build domestic 
value-adding capabilities. We will continue initiatives 
that will create jobs, drive productivity through 
innovation, encourage private sector investment 
and leverage our competitive advantages to unlock 
trade and export opportunities.
The future is looking good, but success will require 
a sustained, collaborative effort across industry, 
government and communities to make sure the 
foundations are in place and industry has the best 
chance possible to achieve its goal.
$b
20
40
60
80
100
Growth based on past 
volume and inﬂation trends  
$73.6b
trend to 2030
Growth based on past 
volume trends and more 
favourable world prices
$100b
2030 goal
$65.9b
2020–21s
2029
–30p
2024
–25p
2019
–20
2014
–15
2009
–10
2004
–05
1999
–2000
1994
–95
Total agriculture 
gross value of production
Current and projected farm gate value
Need to more than 
double the rate of value 
growth (1.9% to 4.7%)
Source: ABARES. Note: s Estimate. p Projection.
FIGURE 1 Ag2030: $100 billion target a challenge

4
Delivering Ag2030
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
Global Drivers and Trends
World prices
Real prices of major Australian agricultural products 
have fallen dramatically since 1950. Although they 
have stabilised, they are unlikely to ever return to 
pre-1950 levels.
Climate
Australian farmers operate in one of the most 
variable environments in the world. Average rainfall 
across Australia’s wheat/sheep zone has declined 
and become more variable, and extreme climate 
events are likely to become more common. 
Trade barriers
Trade barriers can prevent exporters from getting 
premium prices. Globally, non-tariff measures have 
risen by 300% over 30 years, increasing costs to 
businesses. We need to continue our work to break 
down barriers and increase export opportunities.
Free Trade Agreements
We have negotiated 15 FTAs with 26 countries, 
giving Australian industry access to a wide range 
of markets. However, the trade advantages from 
the FTAs could be eroded as competitor countries 
achieve agreements with our partners. 
Premium supplier
Australian farmers enjoy price premiums due 
to our reputation as a producer of high quality 
produce. We must ensure we maintain this 
reputation taking into account changes in consumer 
preferences or international perceptions of our 
production systems.
Pest & disease status
Australia has an enviable pest and disease free 
status, which allows us to access more markets 
and attract premium prices. We must maintain 
this status.

5
Delivering Ag2030
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
Getting our produce to the world
A continued focus on gaining, maintaining and expanding market access is 
essential to achieving the Ag2030 goal. In the 2020–21 Budget we committed 
to the transformative $328.4 million Busting Congestion for Agricultural 
Exporters package. We have already delivered targeted improvements, such 
as increased efficiency in export audits by recognising specific food safety 
and state requirements and new product hygiene indicator reporting for meat 
establishments that supports them to address issues and maintain compliance.
The Agricultural Trade and Market Access Cooperation (ATMAC) program is 
supporting projects to help farmers improve and maintain access to overseas 
markets. We provided around $1.5 million last year and expect to deliver over 
$5.5 million this year. 
We worked across government to help producers respond to and recover from 
trade disruptions in 2020. The government has invested $781.8 million in the 
International Freight Assistance Mechanism (IFAM) since April 2020, to keep 
imports and exports flowing. IFAM kept international freight flights operating, 
preserving market share for agricultural commodities. IFAM will operate 
until the end of September 2021.
We also invested $72.7 million from December 2020 to help Australian 
agribusinesses expand their markets as part of the Agri-Business Expansion 
Initiative (ABEI), by providing one-on-one support services and greater access 
to market intelligence. 
Commencing in March 2021, we delivered the reformed Export Control 
Act 2020 to the export control framework, making it easier for exporters to 
get their goods to market.
Theme 1
Trade and Exports
We are strengthening agricultural ties with major and emerging export markets, and we are making it easier 
to do business. This will deliver new trade and market access for producers, while also reducing red tape.
Australian farmers produce 
enough food to feed 
80 million people
Bringing Australian barley to Mexico
In March 2021, 35,000 tonnes of Australian barley arrived in Mexico for 
Heineken Mexico, with more to follow. This marked the first time Australian 
barley was shipped to Mexico, which is the world’s largest exporter of beer 
but has inadequate local supply of barley to meet demand.
Focused efforts by government supported industry to access this significant 
opportunity, including Australia’s in-country representation, through our 
Agriculture Counsellor, Austrade and the Department of Foreign Affairs 
and Trade, confirming that in-transit and on-shore fumigation of barley are 
acceptable to Mexico. This work was supported by reductions to Mexico’s 
barley import tariff under the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for 
Trans-Pacific Partnership, further demonstrating the benefits of Australia’s FTA 
network for Australian exporters. 
We will continue to work with industry to identify and develop the considerable 
opportunities for Australian agricultural commodities in Latin America.
70% of the value of Australia’s 
agricultural production 
is exported
Over 90% of food consumed 
in Australia is produced here

6
Delivering Ag2030
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
Supporting Australia’s trade future
In the 2021–22 Budget we committed over $96.7 million 
to support trade and production in agricultural markets.
We are investing in gradual steps to transform the way 
we deliver agricultural export services.
Our Busting Congestion for Agricultural Exporters 
package will continue to modernise and streamline 
Australia’s export system. It will lead to annual 
government fees and charges being over $20 million lower 
than without our investment from 2023–24; and generate 
over $200 million of other benefits to industry by 2030.
Digitisation of paper-based export services will be 
implemented over 2021, giving time back to exporters.
We are working closely with Austrade, the Department 
of Foreign Affairs and Trade, and industry to 
rapidly implement the ABEI. This includes finalising 
industry–government grant partnerships to support 
market diversification, and flexibly deploying short-term 
Agriculture Counsellors to priority markets.
We will complement these reforms with new measures to 
step up Australia’s leadership in international agriculture 
policy discussions. This will include intensifying our 
efforts at the World Trade Organization (WTO) to defend 
and reform the rules that underpin global agricultural 
production and trade. We will also enhance engagement 
in global agricultural standard setting bodies. This will 
include a new agricultural envoy, dedicated to protecting 
and enhancing Australia’s reputation for high quality 
agricultural produce, including Australia’s strong track 
record on issues such as food safety, biosecurity and 
animal welfare, and embedding Australian technical 
experts in standard setting bodies.
We will also expand access to agricultural and 
veterinary chemicals for Australian farmers, to boost 
farm productivity and strengthen responses to pests 
and diseases.
These initiatives will provide a foundation for industry 
to leverage our competitive advantages to unlock trade 
and export opportunities.
The government is: 
	Î
providing $15 million to step up Australia’s leadership in international agriculture and food policy discussions 
shaping the global agricultural trade environment 
	Î
delivering $9 million to support expanded access to agricultural and veterinary chemicals
	Î
investing $72.7 million through the Agri-Business Expansion Initiative, to support industry expand and diversify 
access to export markets 
	Î
supporting Australian exporters and business with a stronger overseas presence, sharing market intelligence about 
the challenges and opportunities of overseas markets, increasing our contribution to global efforts to reform the WTO, 
and enhancing Australia’s advocacy and cooperation with international partners
	Î
continuing progress towards the Simplified Trade System, to modernise and improve Australia’s trade system, 
including reviewing regulatory processes and ICT systems that impact cross-border trade.

7
Delivering Ag2030
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
Protecting against rising global risks
A robust, effective biosecurity system is essential to keeping Australia 
safe from exotic pests and diseases, while allowing people and goods to 
flow across our border. Protecting our biosecurity status ensures market 
access and avoids unnecessary costs for our producers. The government has 
increased investment in biosecurity and export services by $304.1 million 
since 2014–15 to a record expected total of $910.1 million in 2020–21.
We have invested in innovative trials and projects, including new 
technology to enhance screening, detection and analytical capabilities. 
We have funded new frontline resources to defend Australia against 
hitchhiker pests and emerging threats in our region, to help safeguard 
the agriculture industry from exotic pests and diseases that if established 
would impact production levels and endanger export markets.
We have also appointed a Chief Environmental Biosecurity Officer to raise 
awareness and build capacity to manage biosecurity risks that impact the 
environment. We have collaborated with CSIRO to fund practical projects 
for management of invasive species and diseases, like carp and exotic 
invasive ants.
In 2020 alone, there were 154 incidents of khapra beetle intercepted in 
goods arriving in Australia, an increase from an average of under 4 annually 
from 2003 to 2019. If established in Australia, khapra beetle could cost 
our grain industry $15.5 billion over 20 years and remove access to key 
markets. Our efforts have ensured Australia remains protected from 
threats like this.
Keeping Australia safe from African swine fever
African swine fever (ASF) is a serious and fatal disease that is a significant 
and evolving threat to Australia’s agriculture industry and our biosecurity 
status. There have been over 11,600 outbreaks of ASF in Asia since 2018.
In addition to being present in countries such as Indonesia, Timor-Leste and 
Papua New Guinea, a new variant is also reportedly in the region.
In the event of an outbreak in Australia, the export of pork or pork products 
would be immediately impacted and eradication activities would commence. 
The cost of a small outbreak is estimated at up to $877 million, while a large 
outbreak could cost $2.0 billion over 5 years. The government responded 
to the international emergence of ASF in 2019 through a $66.6 million ASF 
Response Package. This investment has helped keep ASF out of Australia, 
while also strengthening our ability to prevent other pest and disease risks.
On average 2.5 million 
containers, 19,000 commercial 
vessels and 60 million mail 
items arrive in Australia 
each year
Around 35,000 pest and 
disease border detections are 
recorded across regulated 
pathways each year
New 3D X-rays are more 
than 3 times as effective in 
identifying biosecurity risks 
as 2D X-rays
Theme 2
Biosecurity
We are safeguarding Australia from exotic pests and diseases and maintaining Australia’s clean and green 
reputation, which is critical to our market access and means lower costs for our producers.

8
Delivering Ag2030
Australian Government
A robust, agile and effective biosecurity system for Australia
In the 2021–22 Budget we committed over $400 million 
in new funding to expand our investment in safeguarding 
Australian agriculture and the environment from exotic 
pests and diseases.
We want Australia’s strong, globally recognised 
biosecurity system to continue to reduce the risks of 
exotic pests and diseases arriving in Australia, and 
support rapid and effective responses if they do.
While international travel has temporarily dipped due 
to COVID-19, mail and cargo volumes have grown. For 
example, there has been a 20% increase in document 
lodgments for imported food since May 2020. Each day 
a ship is delayed for biosecurity clearance at the border 
costs industry up to $125,000.
We will continue to invest in frontline resources, 
including even more on-ground staff, and technical 
solutions. This includes 3D X-ray screening of 
international mail, goods and passenger baggage to 
increase accuracy in the detection of biosecurity risks. 
Auto-detection algorithms have doubled the rate of 
detections of biosecurity risk items at Melbourne airport 
and tripled detections at the Melbourne mail centre 
since 2019.
We will continue to strengthen our partnerships with 
industry to mitigate biosecurity risks offshore and 
streamline the entry of goods into Australia, reducing the 
burden of regulatory processes. Under the government’s 
deregulation agenda we will design and deliver up to 
three pilots to test the ability to manage end-to-end 
biosecurity risks across importer supply chains.
Managing biosecurity risks offshore is more cost effective 
than dealing with an incursion or an established pest or 
weed. We will work with our near neighbours, including 
Papua New Guinea, Timor-Leste and those in the Pacific, 
to build local capacity to detect and manage threats, 
generating mutual benefits. We are also modernising our 
data and analytic capabilities and focusing on our own 
emergency preparedness and response planning. 
Our direct investment in the Australian biosecurity 
system complements work underway across government 
towards digital transformation and simplifying trade.
Our ongoing commitment to biosecurity will give 
us confidence that we can continue to keep pest and 
disease threats offshore, and respond to those that reach 
Australia swiftly and effectively.
The government is: 
	Î
committing $235.1 million to strengthen partnerships with importers, companies, producers and the community 
that will build our ability to detect and manage threats offshore and increase capacity to respond to incursions
	Î
investing $80.9 million to build a modern, effective biosecurity system that is underpinned by the right 
technology and analytical capabilities
	Î
delivering $84.1 million for the frontline of our fight to prevent pests and diseases coming to Australia from 
overseas, including more on-the-ground resources to target known and emerging threats, like African swine fever.

9
Delivering Ag2030
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
Encouraging stewardship of our land
Australia’s agriculture industry depends on a biodiverse and well‑managed 
natural resource base, and land managers play a key role in achieving 
environmental outcomes which benefit everyone. We recognise this and are 
providing industry with the tools to adapt to a changing climate and build a 
sustainable resource base for the future.
We are aiming to reduce emissions and contribute towards our emissions 
reduction target of 26% to 28% below 2005 levels by 2030. Our initial 
investment of $34 million in the Agriculture Stewardship Package 
included the design of the Carbon + Biodiversity Pilot and Australian Farm 
Biodiversity Certification Scheme to reward farmers for their efforts in 
delivering biodiversity improvements. 
We provided $4 million to the National Farmers’ Federation to develop and 
trial the Australian Agricultural Sustainability Framework. 
We’re also investing $5 billion in a Future Drought Fund, which will provide 
$100 million each year to build drought preparedness and resilience, 
including investing in natural resource management activities.
Agricultural production 
could be increased by up 
to 58% through improved 
soil management
Rewarding farmers for biodiversity improvements
The Carbon + Biodiversity Pilot is trialling arrangements to reward farmers for 
improving on-farm biodiversity with the government’s Emissions Reduction 
Fund (ERF), which already provides opportunities for farmers to participate 
in emissions reduction and carbon sequestration projects. The pilot is being 
developed with the Australian National University (ANU).
Under the pilot, farmers who plant diverse native trees – in line with a 
biodiversity protocol developed by the ANU – can receive payments for 
biodiversity outcomes over the course of the project. These payments will be 
in addition to earnings received for carbon abatement under the ERF. Plantings 
will also benefit farmers by providing shelter for livestock, improving soil 
moisture and reducing erosion, which will improve productivity and resilience.
Examples of projects could include planting and looking after vegetation, 
or regenerating gullies, waterways and degraded hillsides, with all plantings 
to be protected and maintained for at least 25 years.
The Carbon + Biodiversity Pilot is being run in six Natural Resource Management 
regions in Queensland, New South Wales, Victoria, Tasmania, South Australia 
and Western Australia. Applications for the Pilot opened in April 2021.
Agricultural land managers 
are responsible for managing 
58% of Australia’s land mass
New stewardship market 
opportunities will pave 
the way for private sector 
investment and new income 
streams for farmers
Theme 3
Stewardship
We are ensuring Australian farmers are rewarded for their stewardship of land and water.

10
Delivering Ag2030
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
Supporting farmers to deliver environmental outcomes
In the 2021–22 Budget we committed over $246 million 
to expand support for agriculture stewardship and 
create market opportunities for farmers who improve 
biodiversity, including through improved management 
of soils.
A market approach to biodiversity improvements will 
be trialled to pay farmers for improved management 
of existing high value remnant vegetation. This will 
encourage better land management, build resilience 
against climate challenges and support trade access 
– all while increasing biodiversity and delivering new 
income opportunities.
We are also implementing the Australian Farm 
Biodiversity Certification Scheme, to reward farmers for 
biodiversity efforts and support market access. 
We are establishing a Biodiversity Trading Platform 
to connect farmers with business looking to buy 
these environmental services, including from the 
Carbon + Biodiversity methodology.
In the 2021–22 Budget, we announced the next suite of 
programs under the Future Drought Fund, committing 
$170.5 million to continue to provide farmers and 
regional communities the tools they need to build 
drought resilience.
International evidence shows agricultural production 
could be increased by 58% through improved sustainable 
soil management. We will deliver the National Soils 
Strategy and commence work on major initiatives 
to implement this strategy, including a Soil Science 
Challenge grants program and working with Soil Science 
Australia and the Cooperative Research Centre for 
High Performance Soils to establish and trial a new soil 
practitioner accreditation.
A pilot soil testing program will improve business 
decision making, unlock significant agricultural 
productivity gains and provide data to guide investments 
in soil health across Australia.
We will also deliver the Food Waste for Healthy Soils Fund 
to divert organic waste from landfill to productive use 
on agricultural soils. Diverting 80% of organic waste to 
farms would save more than 2 million tonnes of carbon, 
equivalent to planting more than 3 million trees or taking 
nearly 500,000 cars off the road each year.
We will continue to work with industry to maintain 
healthy ecosystems, which are of critical importance 
to future production, the environment, regional 
communities and the broader economy.
 
The government is: 
	Î
providing $22.3 million to conduct scientifically robust on-ground trials to test methods to reward farmers for improving 
native vegetation through the Enhancing Remnant Vegetation Pilot
	Î
providing $5.4 million to implement the Australian Farm Biodiversity Certification Scheme, to provide a credible, 
independent assessment of how farmers are protecting biodiversity
	Î
providing $4.4 million for the development of a biodiversity trading platform 
	Î
committing $214.9 million to implement the National Soil Strategy and associated measures, including piloting the 
National Soil Monitoring and Incentives Pilot program, establishing a National Soil Science Challenge grants 
program to address gaps in soil knowledge, developing a new education accreditation in soil science and establishing 
the Food Waste for Healthy Soils Fund
	Î
providing $1.2 billion over ten years to create a technology co-investment facility to support the development of 
priority technologies, including regional hydrogen hubs, carbon capture, use and storage technologies, very low cost soil 
carbon measurement and new agricultural feed technologies.

11
Delivering Ag2030
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
Investing to strengthen supply chains
Robust and transparent domestic supply chains underpin a strong, effective 
Australian agriculture industry and are essential to achieving industry’s 
2030 goal.
We are committed to improving competition and fairness across supply 
chains. Codes of conduct have been established for the Dairy, Wheat Port, 
Sugar and Horticulture industries, to address egregious behaviour and keep 
dealings clear and transparent.
The government continued its efforts to address market imbalances across 
domestic fresh food supply chains, directing the ACCC to undertake an 
inquiry into the harmful imbalance of bargaining power between farmers, 
intermediaries and retailers.
In December 2020, the ACCC released the findings of their inquiry. 
The government is progressing a number of initiatives in response to 
their recommendations in order to address bargaining power imbalances 
in domestic supply chains.
Ensuring fair and transparent conduct throughout 
the supply chains
At the beginning of 2020, the government implemented clear and enforceable 
rules about the conduct of business relationships between dairy farmers and 
processors, through the mandatory Dairy Code of Conduct. These changes help 
rebalance bargaining power and improve transparency in transactions. 
Since the Code’s initial operation, there have been a number of positive 
developments including increased competition among processors of raw 
milk prices, and increased transparency as farmers were able to access price 
information. A review of the Code will be conducted in second half 2021 to 
examine its effectiveness and impact. 
Over 243,000 people are 
employed in the food and 
beverage manufacturing 
sectors alone
Australian agriculture 
accounts for 2.6% of 
national employment, and 
over 1.6 million people are 
employed across the broader 
supply chains
Agricultural employment 
growth has been spurred by 
Australia’s participation in 
global value chains
Theme 4
Supply Chains
We are backing fair, strong and resilient supply chains and putting in place the frameworks so everyone 
is treated fairly and pays their share.

12
Delivering Ag2030
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
The government is: 
	Î
committing $5.4 million to improve market transparency by taking action on the ACCC Perishable Agricultural 
Goods Inquiry
	Î
continuing to implement the $1.5 billion Modern Manufacturing Strategy, with the Food and Beverage Road Map 
released in March 2021 – one of six National Manufacturing Priority road maps now published – with Round 1 Food 
and Beverage priority grants to be allocated
	Î
investing $107.2 million in the Supply Chain Resilience Initiative to address vulnerabilities in critical supply chains 
as part of the Modern Manufacturing Strategy
	Î
improving supply chain competition and fairness through codes of conduct for Dairy, Wheat Port, Sugar and Horticulture
	Î
adopting a whole-of-Government framework for identifying and mitigating critical supply chain risks
	Î
strengthening unfair contract term protections in Australian Consumer Law, including making unfair contract terms 
unlawful, and expanding the definition of small business to increase eligibility.
Supply chain resilience underpins production
In the 2021–22 Budget we committed $5.4 million to 
improve market transparency for more fair agricultural 
supply chains, in response to recommendations of 
the December 2020 ACCC Perishable Agricultural 
Goods Inquiry.
We will address findings of the Productivity 
Commission’s Review into Vulnerable Supply Chains. 
The review is examining risks to the functioning of 
the Australian economy and Australians’ wellbeing 
from disruptions to global supply chains, including 
intermediate goods such as fertiliser, agrochemicals 
and seeds, manufactured goods and other inputs. It is 
expected to include a framework for identifying supply 
chains that are vulnerable to disruption and possible 
approaches to managing them.
We are working with the Office of Supply Chain Resilience 
(OSCR) to monitor supply chain vulnerabilities. OSCR is 
working with whole-of-Government partners, industry 
and academia to improve Australia’s access to essential 
goods, including for the agriculture industry. 
We will also continue to progress the Modern 
Manufacturing Strategy, including building scale in 
our onshore processing and packaging capability and 
encouraging the adoption of smart technologies.
We will also strengthen protection against the risk of 
devastating pests and diseases to ensure robust domestic 
supply chain production.
The government’s $5 billion investment in freight and 
regional roads will also strengthen domestic agricultural 
supply chains, with additional funding for upgrades to 
the Great Western Highway in NSW, the Bruce Highway 
in QLD and METRONET in WA.

13
Delivering Ag2030
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
Increasing infrastructure’s reach for all
Investment in regional infrastructure and transport, digital connectivity and 
water security projects creates and supports local jobs and rural and regional 
communities, and improves the efficiency of the agriculture industry.
The delivery of the National Water Infrastructure Development Fund is helping to 
identify and build new water infrastructure, contributing to regional Australia’s 
long-term economic growth and development.
Farmers who install on-farm water infrastructure also benefit from the On-farm 
Emergency Water Infrastructure Rebate that will reduce their infrastructure 
costs. We have also committed to the Murray–Darling Communities Investment 
Package, which puts communities and jobs at the heart of achieving a sustainable 
and certain future for the Basin.
As technology progresses, so too do the ways in which regional communities 
and farmers communicate and manage their businesses. To improve regional 
communication, the government has committed $90.3 million for 81 ‘place-based’ 
telecommunications infrastructure projects across regional Australia to ensure 
that our infrastructure keeps pace with technology. We continue to provide 
additional investment through the Regional Connectivity Package to support 
recovery and growth in priority investment regions. We are also continuing to 
invest in the NBN to improve rural and regional Australia’s access.
The Murray–Darling Basin 
accounts for two thirds 
of agricultural water use 
in Australia
Irrigated crops make up 30% 
of the value of Australia’s 
agricultural production
By 2030, the 1,700 kilometre 
Inland Rail project will 
support 2.32 million tonnes 
of freight between Melbourne 
and Brisbane
New storage improves water access for iconic 
wine region
In 2020, the McLaren Vale Treated Water Storage Project established the McLaren 
Vale Water Storage Facility at Seaford Heights in South Australia. Jointly funded by 
the Australian Government ($2.5 million) and industry partners ($4.9 million), the 
facility stores water from the Christies Beach Waste Water Treatment Plant and 
helps to meet irrigation demand for wine grapes produced in the iconic McLaren 
Vale wine region. Construction included a new 600 megalitre water storage dam 
and a supply connection to the existing Quarry Road pump station. The recycled 
water will augment groundwater drawn from aquifers across the region.
The project has boosted water security and economic resilience for local industry 
and the broader region. It can supply up to 750 megalitres of treated water 
for irrigation and enable vineyard expansion by up to 500 hectares. This will 
increase premium grape production by up to 3,750 tonnes, worth $5.5 million in 
grape production for McLaren Vale, making the premium wine production worth 
around $33.75 million annually. The improvements have also reduced wastewater 
discharge into the Gulf Saint Vincent, improving water quality and sustainability. 
The project supports approximately 170 ongoing new winery and vineyard farm 
jobs in the McLaren Vale, Willunga and Sellicks regions.
Theme 5
Water and Infrastructure
We are supporting Australian farmers and rural and regional communities with infrastructure 
when and where it is needed.

14
Delivering Ag2030
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
Keeping water and goods moving
In the 2021–22 Budget, the Australian Government 
committed an additional $15.2 billion in new funding 
for infrastructure projects, which will support an 
estimated 30,000 jobs across Australia, including rural 
and regional Australia.
As part of this investment, we are making sure we have 
the right infrastructure in place to support agricultural 
communities and efficient production. Across 
government we have introduced a range of measures 
that support regional Australia’s sustainability, 
resilience and job creation.
We are ensuring Australia’s water resources are 
managed well, now and in the future. We are working 
with the Murray–Darling Basin Authority to help 
manage the water in the Murray–Darling Basin. 
This includes the Murray–Darling Basin Integrated 
River Modelling Uplift Program, which will improve 
day-to-day operations, and help future planning.
The government has identified measures in response 
to the ACCC inquiry into the Murray–Darling Basin 
water markets. An expert panel will be established 
to consult with the Australian Government, 
Murray–Darling Basin states, industry and other 
stakeholders to build a phased Road Map for improving 
transparency and accessibility of water information.
We are also continuing to fund National Water 
Grid projects. 
We have a shared interest in current and new 
infrastructure projects and proposals. This includes 
investing in road and rail across every Australian 
state and territory to improve the movement of 
people and goods, and delivering initiatives under the 
National Freight and Supply Chain Strategy. 
The government is also supporting the continued 
delivery of Inland Rail by 2025, which will boost future 
access into domestic and international markets for many 
farmers and farming communities, and help capture 
broader commercial and employment opportunities. 
The government is investing in the Digital Economy 
Strategy, to support Australia to be a leading digital 
economy and ensure businesses across all sectors are 
able to lift productivity and be globally competitive. 
This is complemented by funding for infrastructure 
projects to provide people and businesses in regional 
Australia access to improved broadband services and 
data, delivering fast, affordable and reliable connectivity.
The government is: 
	Î
providing $1.5 billion to continue efforts to achieve a sustainable and certain future for the Murray–Darling Basin 
	Î
providing $348 million to support regional Australia’s sustainability, resilience and job creation including 
investment in community infrastructure and support the delivery of reliable, affordable and innovative digital services
	Î
investing $3.5 million for an expert panel to develop a phased Road Map for water market reform 
	Î
extending the $100 million On-farm Emergency Water Infrastructure Rebate Scheme to 30 June 2022 
	Î
investing $3.5 billion in water infrastructure through the National Water Grid Fund 
	Î
investing over $5 billion in freight and regional roads across every state and territory 
	Î
providing an additional $28.6 million to deliver initiatives as part of the National Freight and Supply Chain Strategy
	Î
delivering on its commitment of $380 million to the Mobile Black Spot Program with Round 6 expected to open shortly 
	Î
providing $189.6 million to support the next Five-Year Plan for Northern Australia
	Î
investing in our digital economy, including opportunities for regional Australia and agricultural businesses, 
by providing $1.2 billion for the Digital Economy Strategy.

15
Delivering Ag2030
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
Evolving industry through innovation
Australia’s agriculture industry has a strong tradition of developing and 
adopting innovative solutions to new challenges. Investment in, and adoption 
of, innovation drives down input costs and increases outputs, and is critical to 
achieving the industry’s ambitious goal by 2030. This is why we committed to 
the National Agricultural Innovation Agenda.
Under this Agenda, we supported the establishment of Agricultural 
Innovation Australia (AIA) by investing $1.3 million to drive a cross-industry 
approach to innovation, in collaboration with the 15 Rural Research and 
Development Corporations.
As part of the government’s $117.3 million Drought Resilience Research and 
Adoption Program, we’ve leveraged $114 million in co-contributions with 
143 partner organisations to establish 8 Drought Resilience Adoption and 
Innovation Hubs in over 40 locations, delivered through the Future Drought 
Fund. The regional Hubs will connect farmers, industry, agribusiness and 
communities with drought resilience expertise, and contribute to the 
development and adoption of innovative practices.
We have also launched growAg to help connect research and development 
outcomes to Australians and the world.
Each year, producers invest more than $500 million in research and 
development levies to support research and development activities. Building on 
this, the government invests over $300 million annually in additional matched 
funding to further improve the profitability, productivity, competitiveness and 
long-term sustainability of Australia’s primary industries.
Small agricultural businesses 
contribute 75% of the value 
added by agriculture
Digital tools can save small 
businesses 10 hours per week 
and boost revenue by 27%
Fully implementing digital 
agriculture could lift the 
gross value of production by 
$20.3 billion annually
New platform for innovation and research
growAG is a new online platform that showcases innovative agricultural 
research, technologies, and commercialisation opportunities in one central 
location. The platform was launched in April 2021 and is the result of an 
ongoing collaboration between government and Australia’s 15 Rural Research 
and Development Corporations. Currently, growAG showcases 2002 research 
projects, 22 commercial opportunities and 90 agricultural organisations, which 
will grow as the platform develops and expands.
growAG allows easy access to research projects across different commodities. 
This increased visibility will accelerate commercialisation, leverage global 
expertise and enhance transparency for levy payers and the community. 
growAG will also improve collaboration and reduce duplication, so investments 
are targeted to activities that will maximise productivity and ensure the long-
term prosperity of the Australian agriculture industry.
Theme 6
Innovation and Research
We are providing the right conditions to modernise Australia’s agricultural innovation system, which will 
drive improvements in collaboration, commercialisation and uptake to grow agricultural productivity 
and competitiveness.

16
Delivering Ag2030
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
New technology helping Australia stay competitive
In the 2021–22 Budget we committed over $34 million to further support 
Australia’s agricultural innovation. We are positioning Australian agriculture 
to easily adopt innovation and technologies, delivering value to industry and 
community, and commercial returns to the innovation community.
As part of the National Agricultural Innovation Agenda, we are developing 
a National Agricultural Innovation Policy Statement to focus investment 
in national challenges and outline how we are creating a world-leading 
agricultural innovation system. This includes four new National Agricultural 
Innovation Priorities (missions). Through the 2021–22 Budget, we are 
providing an additional $1.5 million for AIA to develop investment strategies for 
these missions.
We are also developing the Digital Foundations for Agriculture Strategy that 
sets clear, long-term goals to encourage uptake of digital technologies. 
Under the government’s Deregulation Agenda, we are providing $20 million 
to Commonwealth fisheries for data integration, monitoring and artificial 
intelligence, to reduce regulatory burden, increase productivity, and improve 
environmental outcomes.
The government is investing in new technologies identified in the Technology 
Investment Roadmap and Low Emissions Technology Statements to reduce 
emissions in the land sector. This includes $36.7 million for a national soil carbon 
innovation challenge, to help reduce the cost of soil carbon measurement to 
under $3 per hectare per year. 
It also includes $23 million to help develop and trial technologies to deliver methane inhibiting feed supplements to 
grazing livestock, which represent around 95% of the national herd. This builds on $6 million already committed to 
support the development of feed supplements and forage feeds that reduce emissions and deliver productivity gains.
APRIL 2021
Launch of growAg
APRIL 2021
Drought Resilience Adoption 
and Innovation Hubs established
JUNE 2021
Release of the National Agricultural 
Innovation Policy Statement
JUNE 2021
Release of the Digital Foundations 
for Agriculture Strategy
The government is: 
	Î
building on the National Agricultural Innovation Agenda by developing a National Agricultural Innovation Policy 
Statement, with an initial $1.5 million to develop investment strategies
	Î
providing $11.9 million to support innovation in the forestry sector, including extending the existing nine Regional 
Forestry Hubs and creating two new Hubs
	Î
committing $20.1 million towards fisheries deregulation through technological innovation to boost productivity 
and competitiveness.

17
Delivering Ag2030
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
Ensuring skilled labour access 
for industry
The success of the agriculture industry relies on the strength, resilience and 
wellbeing of its human workforce and the communities that support them. 
In response to labour challenges encountered in 2020, the government 
restarted the Pacific Labour mobility schemes, introduced the Agriculture 
Workers’ Code to make sure state border closures do not impede access to 
seasonal workers from around Australia, and changed visa arrangements to 
permit backpackers and seasonal workers in Australia to continue working in 
agriculture. We also introduced AgMove, which supported over 1,400 people 
move to rural and regional areas for short-term agricultural work between 
November 2020 and April 2021.
We’re also supporting farmers and farm businesses through the Rural 
Financial Counselling Service, with more than 12,000 farmers across Australia 
helped by the last round of funding alone.
The government also boosted education and training, and encouraged 
more hiring of, and uptake of jobs by young Australians. In 2021, we funded 
50,000 places across 400 short courses in priority fields including agriculture. 
We also introduced the Job-Ready Graduates Package of reforms for higher 
education, which will create up to 30,000 additional university places in 2021. 
This complements the JobTrainer Fund which provides free training in areas 
of needed skills. The reforms have already reduced student contributions for 
agricultural courses by 59% and seen a 5% increase in enrolments for 2021 
compared to 2020. 
To further encourage young people to enter the workforce, we also amended 
Youth Allowance and ABSTUDY eligibility to include people working in 
agriculture in regional Australia.
82% of the agriculture 
workforce live in rural and 
regional areas
By 2030, 1 in 3 new 
jobs created in the 
agriculture industry will be 
technology related
334,000 people are employed 
across agriculture sectors
Labour assistance helps during challenging year
Over 5,000 Pacific and Timorese workers have arrived in Australia since the 
Pacific Labour mobility schemes were restarted in August 2020, to help meet 
shortages in agriculture, including mangoes, citrus, berries, apples, carrots, 
cauliflower, almonds and meat processing.
We have also helped facilitate over 10,000 redeployments of Pacific and Timorese 
workers already in Australia (with their agreement). For example, a group of 
ni-Vanuatu PLS tourism and hospitality workers were redeployed to work in the 
horticulture sector to pick mandarins, lemons and limes in Monduran, south-east 
Queensland. These redeployments have helped meet workforce demands across 
critical industries in rural and regional Australia, including in agriculture.
Theme 7
Human Capital
We are making sure people and their communities, right across the agriculture industry and supply chain, 
have the support, infrastructure and skills to do their jobs.

18
Delivering Ag2030
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
The government is: 
	Î
providing $25.2 million in new funding for AgATTRACT, to shift perceptions of modern agriculture and recognise 
its diverse career opportunities, including:
	
\ piloting AgCAREERSTART to give school leavers a way to experience working in agriculture
	
\ providing more opportunities for upskilling and career progression with AgUP grants
	Î
committing $4.6 million to AgFAIR to improve workforce management and planning, and to create attractive, 
fair and safe working conditions
	Î
providing $2.6 million to expand the Career Revive program to support more medium to large regional 
businesses attract and retain women returning to work after a career break
	Î
committing $26.1 million to assist 5,000 additional short course places in 2021
	Î
helping eligible job seekers temporarily relocate for agricultural work under AgMove
	Î
supporting a fair and attractive workforce by helping small businesses meet modern award obligations through 
Employment Contract Tools and the Employer Advisory Service
	Î
amending the Migration Act to strengthen protections for workers against exploitation
	Î
enhancing primary care, health workforce and mental health services, including digital mental health services, 
to support small business owners and regional Australians 
	Î
supporting primary producers and small businesses affected by disasters, under Disaster Recovery Funding Arrangements 
	Î
waiving farm business income reconciliation debts incurred by the Farm Household Allowance up to 2019–20
	Î
extending the instant asset write-off to June 2023 to allow farmers to immediately deduct the full cost of eligible 
depreciable assets.
Building the agriculture workforce of the future
In the 2021–22 Budget we committed over $29.8 million 
to improve employment opportunities and conditions in 
the agriculture sector.
The government released a Road Map in March 2021, 
in response to the National Agricultural Workforce 
Strategy, outlining our vision for the agriculture industry 
and next steps. We are introducing initiatives to bolster 
industry’s capacity to build and train its workforce, 
address systemic barriers and meet increasing labour 
needs into the future. We will also support more regional 
businesses attract and retain women returning to work 
after a career break. 
Across government, we are delivering measures to 
support rural communities recover from the challenges of 
2020, including increasing funding for the Rural Financial 
Counselling Service, extending the Drought Communities 
Small Business Pilot Program and waiving Business 
Income Reconciliation Debts accrued under the Farm 
Household Allowance.
We are delivering Plantation Development Concessional 
Loans through existing Regional Investment Corporation 
loan funds to encourage new plantation developments 
and the replanting of bushfire-damaged plantations.
The government is also expanding access to mental and 
primary health care services for regional Australians, 
who make up the bulk of the agricultural workforce. 
Digital health services will be expanded to ensure 
easier access and we will support the delivery of 
primary care and a skilled health workforce in rural and 
remote Australia.
The government’s deregulation agenda will continue to 
make it easier for businesses to get people into jobs and 
interact with government.

19
Delivering Ag2030
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
The Australian Government is setting the right foundations across the 7 Ag2030 themes to give industry what it 
needs for success in the future, and to have the best environment possible to reach the industry’s Ag2030 goal. 
Measures outlined in this booklet build on those announced in previous budgets. Our focus going forward will 
remain on delivering on our commitments so that agriculture remains a profitable, productive and innovative 
industry that drives growth and job creation in rural and regional Australia.
Delivering Ag2030 will be updated annually to reflect future initiatives.
To stay up to date visit awe.gov.au/ag2030.
Future Steps
Biosecurity
Stewardship
Supply Chains
Water and
Infrastructure
Innovation and
Research
Human Capital
Trade and
Exports

© Commonwealth of Australia 2021
Ownership of intellectual property rights 
Unless otherwise noted, copyright (and any other intellectual property 
rights) in this publication is owned by the Commonwealth of Australia 
(referred to as the Commonwealth).
Creative Commons licence 
All material in this publication is licensed under a Creative Commons 
Attribution 4.0 International Licence except content supplied by third 
parties, logos and the Commonwealth Coat of Arms.
 
Inquiries about the licence and any use of this document should be emailed 
to copyright@awe.gov.au.
Cataloguing data  
This publication (and any material sourced from it) should be attributed 
as: DAWE 2021, Delivering Ag2030, Department of Agriculture, Water 
and the Environment, Canberra, May. CC BY 4.0.
ISBN 978-1-76003-414-6
This publication is available at awe.gov.au/publications.
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
GPO Box 858 Canberra ACT 2601 
Telephone 1800 900 090 
Web awe.gov.au
Disclaimer 
The Australian Government acting through the Department of 
Agriculture, Water and the Environment has exercised due care and skill 
in preparing and compiling the information and data in this publication. 
Notwithstanding, the Department of Agriculture, Water and the 
Environment, its employees and advisers disclaim all liability, including 
liability for negligence and for any loss, damage, injury, expense or cost 
incurred by any person as a result of accessing, using or relying on any 
of the information or data in this publication to the maximum extent 
permitted by law.
ADA180.0421