The 2021 Independent Review of the Pesticides and 
Veterinary Medicines Regulatory System in Australia 
What do the proposed changes mean for…  
CONSUMERS? 
 
As an independent Panel, we have reviewed the Australian pesticides and veterinary medicines 
regulatory system. We have recommended changes that will improve the way you interact with 
pesticides and veterinary medicines in your everyday life. 
Pesticides that you might use day-to-day include bait for vermin, cockroaches, ants, and snails; weed 
killer; and fly spray. Veterinary medicines might include medicine for your pet’s illnesses and health 
conditions; products such as wormers; or for flea and tick protection. 
Pesticides and veterinary medicines are also used in the agricultural industry to protect crops and 
livestock from pests and diseases. The regulatory framework ensures farmers and growers know 
how to use products safely, so the produce you eat is safe for consumption.  
Our recommended changes include: 
• 
Increased monitoring and surveillance. Nation-wide environmental monitoring will monitor 
pesticides in our soil and waterways, while a domestic produce monitoring program will test 
for pesticide and veterinary medicine residues in produce destined for human and animal 
consumption (Recommendation 12).  
• 
A humaneness score on product labels. This score will help you make an informed decision 
by telling you how humane a vertebrate pest control product is when compared to other 
products available for the same purpose (Recommendation 17). 
• 
Wider access to specialist veterinary medicines. Your veterinarian will have access to more 
medicinal options to respond to your pets’ individual health needs (Recommendation 36). 
• 
Electronic access to product labels and leaflets. Product labels and leaflets will be made 
available online to help you stay up to date, understand what the product does, and how to 
use it safely (Recommendation 24). 
• 
Streamlined adverse experience reporting. If you observe an adverse reaction on a person, 
animal or in your garden, from use of a pesticide or veterinary medicine, there will be one 
central place for you to lodge a report (Recommendation 13). 
Other recommended changes that will give you peace of mind that the system is working as 
intended include: 
• 
Uniform training standards. Consistent training standards will give you confidence that 
chemical applicators, including pest controllers are always applying, handling and disposing

of products in a safe manner, regardless of where in Australia they are working 
(Recommendations 19-21). 
• 
Consistent rules for using pesticides and veterinary medicines. The same standards and 
usage patterns for pesticides and veterinary medicines will apply across Australia, regardless 
of which state or territory the produce is grown in (Recommendation 43). 
• 
Emergency preparedness. Products will be available to respond to pest and disease 
outbreaks to ensure the health and safety of people, animals, our crops, and the 
environment (Recommendation 39). 
• 
Formal recognition of industry quality assurance schemes. These schemes ensure 
Australian produce meets consistently high standards, giving you confidence that the food 
you eat is safe and has been produced with consideration given to safety, the environment 
and sustainability (Recommendation 19). 
• 
Streamlined chemical reviews. Formal triggers will mean that chemical reviews are 
undertaken and completed more quickly, meaning that the safety and necessity of chemical 
products is regularly considered (Recommendation 14). 
• 
Consultation forums. The establishment of a stakeholder forum between government and a 
range of key stakeholders will mean that your views are represented (Recommendation 10). 
Find out more about our recommendations by reading the final report or visiting 
haveyoursay.awe.gov.au/agvet-chemicals-regulatory-reform.  
Do you have interests outside of being a consumer? View our other resources that might be relevant 
to you.