The 2021 Independent Review of the Pesticides and 
Veterinary Medicines Regulatory System in Australia 
What do the proposed changes mean for…  
VETERINARIANS? 
 
As an independent Panel, we have reviewed the Australian pesticides and veterinary medicines 
regulatory system. We have recommended changes that will improve the way you access, use, 
compound and prescribe veterinary medicines.  
Our recommended changes will help you conduct your business by: 
• 
Providing consistent national access to products and uses. Approved uses of veterinary 
medicines and prescribing rights currently vary between states and territories. Under the 
proposed new system, approved uses will be consistent across Australia, making it easier for 
you to operate across borders (Recommendation 43). 
• 
Giving you access to international medicines. A new licensing scheme for internationally 
registered products will provide access to veterinary medicines not currently registered in 
Australia (including niche products), including for high value and exotic animal species. A 
greater access to products and uses will help you better manage animal welfare 
(Recommendation 36). 
• 
Providing formal recognition of the role of compounded medicines. The important role 
compounded veterinary medicines play in a veterinarian’s toolkit is formally recognised 
under the recommended changes (Recommendation 31). 
• 
Providing clear guidance on which medicines can be used and when. A protocol has been 
developed to guide you on choosing suitable types of products for use, including how and 
when compounded products can be used (Recommendation 31). 
• 
Giving you up-to-date labelling information. Live updates to product labels will allow you to 
quickly inform animal owners about responsible use and will mean that consumers using 
products under your direction will have better access to safety information 
(Recommendation 24).  
• 
Improving the system for adverse experience reporting. A more user-friendly system for 
reporting of adverse experiences relating to the use of veterinary medicines, and the 
establishment of a system wide ‘pharmacovigilance’ approach will allow you to better report 
adverse experiences and determine if there are issues with products you are considering 
prescribing or dispensing (Recommendation 13).

Other recommended changes that will support the veterinary industry include: 
• 
Giving you a national voice. The establishment of a stakeholder forum will allow you to 
contribute to discussions that concern and impact you and the animals you treat 
(Recommendation 10). 
• 
Improving Australia’s emergency preparedness. Streamlining systems to prepare for, and 
react to, emergency events (such as exotic animal diseases) by approving permits in advance 
of an anticipated outbreak, will ensure Australia’s veterinary industry is ready to respond 
promptly (Recommendation 39). 
• 
New national leadership. The new Commissioner for Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines 
will provide greater accountability throughout the entire system (Recommendation 7).  
Find out more about our recommendations by reading the final report or visiting 
haveyoursay.awe.gov.au/agvet-chemicals-regulatory-reform.  
Not a veterinarian? View our other resources that might be relevant to you.