Management of Less than Container Load (LCL) and Freight of All Kinds (FAK) containers for BMSB

The Brown Marmorated Stink Bug (BMSB) seasonal measures will apply to targeted goods manufactured in/or shipped from target risk countries shipped between 1 September and 30 April (inclusive).

You must comply with these measures for goods during the BMSB risk season.

During the BMSB risk season, Less than Container Load (LCL) consignments and Freight of All Kinds (FAK) containers with target high risk goods will be managed at the container level. Deconsolidation or removal of goods will not be permitted before treatment.

Seasonal measures apply to LCL/FAK containers that consist of goods that originate from or are 
shipped from a target risk country. This applies to any LCL consignment inside the FAK container that 
has been shipped from or originated in a target risk country.

The Master Consolidator declaration form is a secure online form that can be accessed through the department’s agriculture.gov.au/bmsb webpage.

Register as a Master Consolidator for the BMSB risk season

Master Consolidators managing goods during the BMSB risk season must register with the department to receive a unique Master Consolidator Identification number (MC ID). Without this you will not be able to lodge LCL/FAK declarations for this season. Each Master Consolidator must use their own unique ID when lodging a declaration.

Master Consolidators can register for a MC ID on the department’s agriculture.gov.au/bmsb webpage. Once registered, an automated email with MC ID and login details will be provided to the nominated contacts.

Note: All users will need to download the Microsoft Authenticator app onto a portable device (i.e., phone, tablet etc.) to enable use of the new lodgement portal.

Note: Once you are a registered user, your login will remain active. There is no requirement to re-register every year. All registration amendments including company details, company and user email addresses, new MC users or deactivation of existing accounts, can be sent to HPP@aff.gov.au using the Master Consolidator Registration form.

Issues with your Authenticator code?

Users that have previously registered, however, have changed phones or phone numbers, may have difficulties logging into the portal with their authenticator code. In these instances, please email HPP@aff.gov.au to get a reset of your login.

Lodging a Master Consolidators Declaration Form

Registered Master Consolidators must enter in relevant details about the LCL/FAK container/s being imported including incoming vessel information, declaration of target high risk goods, and supporting documentation for any declarations made such as offshore treatment certificates.

Visit the department’s agriculture.gov.au/bmsb webpage to find how to complete the BMSB Master Consolidator declaration form.

Lodgement prior to the first port of entry in Australia

Master Consolidators must complete the online declaration form discussed above prior to the arrival of the vessel in the first port of arrival in Australia.

It is important that declarations are provided as early as possible. This will assist for timelier 
clearance of the container and to reduce the likelihood risk of Seasonal Pest holds delaying these containers at the wharf.

If a declaration is not provided before arrival, the container will be held at the wharf under a Seasonal Pest hold (SPHOLD) until a declaration is provided. If there is no contact or declaration made by the Master Consolidator after 35 business days of the consignment being lodged into Import Cargo System, the container will be directed for export.

Once a declaration has been received and matched to the container details in ICS, if the container has been treated offshore, it will be permitted to deconsolidate as per normal processes. If the container has been nominated for onshore treatment, the container will be permitted to move immediately to an Approved Arrangement site for treatment.

Enquiries and information regarding MC declaration lodgements

For all questions and information related directly to BMSB LCL / FAK declarations, assessments, directions and / or MC declaration lodgements, email BMSB Processing Team on BMSBprocessing@aff.gov.au.

Managing expected onshore delays

Importers should note the policy to allow onshore treatment of containers is expected to result in increased clearance delays at the border.

To minimise clearance delays, industry is encouraged to have their target high risk goods treated offshore and at the container level, if possible.

See. Secure. Report.

Seen something unusual? Report it, even if you are not sure.

Pests and diseases can spread quickly over large distances, so it is essential that you report what you find as soon as possible.

If you see something that could have entered Australia with imported goods, secure the goods and report it by phoning 1800 798 636 or completing the online form available on agriculture.gov.au/report.

More information

Visit agriculture.gov.au/bmsb for:

seasonal measures for BMSB.

preparing to import BMSB goods.

what happens to your goods on arrival?

a list of target risk countries for BMSB.

a complete list of goods categorised as ‘target high risk’ and ‘target risk’.

Watch the hitchhiker pest webinar series available at agriculture.gov.au.

Email HPP@aff.gov.au for policy related queries.

Visit agriculture.gov.au/subscribe to subscribe to newsletter and Industry Advice Notices and keep up to date on changes to import requirements, including updates to BMSB seasonal measures.