Brown Marmorated Stink Bug

The Brown Marmorated Stink Bug (BMSB) (Halyomorpha halys) is an insect that is exotic to Australia and considered a seasonal hitchhiker pest.

Adult BMSB are 12 to 17 millimetres long and mottled with a faint reddish tinge. While species of stink bugs in Australia may look similar, adult BMSB have distinctive black and white banding around the edge of the abdomen with white bands on the last 2 antennal segments.

BMSB can produce huge populations that become a major problem for our agriculture industries because it feeds on more than 300 types of plants and trees. It is also a household nuisance because it invades homes and sheds in mass numbers, and as the name suggests, it emits an offensive smell.

Australia’s vulnerability

BMSB is native to East Asia and found in China, Japan, and South Korea. After being accidently introduced, BMSB has rapidly spread through the United States of America and Europe and could potentially establish in Australia.

Australia is one of the few countries in the world to remain free of major pests, diseases and weeds that can affect human, animal or plant health.

While Australia’s isolation offers a level of protection, our environment is suitable for certain exotic pests and diseases to establish and thrive.

If it established in Australia, this pest would be extremely difficult and expensive to manage. It is not easily controlled with pesticides, and it feeds on a large range of plants.

How it could get here

International travel and trade provide opportunities for BMSB to hitchhike their way into Australia. They may arrive on cargo of all kinds, but commonly hidden in and around machinery and vehicles and on/in sea containers from risk countries.

They can be found on goods arriving in Australia between September and April – coinciding with late Autumn and Winter in the Northern Hemisphere. This is known as the BMSB risk season.

More information

Visit agriculture.gov.au/bmsb for:

seasonal measures for BMSB.

preparing to import BMSB goods.

what happens to your goods on arrival?

a list of target risk countries for BMSB.

a complete list of goods categorised as ‘target high risk’ and ‘target risk’.

Watch the hitchhiker pest webinar series available at agriculture.gov.au.

Email HPP@aff.gov.au for policy related queries.

Visit agriculture.gov.au/subscribe to subscribe to newsletter and Industry Advice Notices and keep up to date on changes to import requirements, including updates to BMSB seasonal measures.