Target high risk and risk goods for the Brown Marmorated Stink Bug risk season

The Brown Marmorated Stink Bug (BMSB) seasonal measures will apply to targeted goods manufactured in/or shipped from target risk countries shipped between 1 September and 30 April (inclusive).

Any target high risk or target risk goods which are manufactured in/or shipped from the target risk countries will be subject to BMSB seasonal measures. Any vessel that berths at, loads, or tranships from the target risk countries is also subject to BMSB seasonal measures.

Goods must comply with these measures during the BMSB risk season.

Target risk countries:

Albania

Andorra

Armenia

Austria

Azerbaijan

Belgium

Bosnia and Herzegovina

Bulgaria

Canada

Croatia

Czechia

France

Georgia

Germany

Greece

Hungary

Italy

Kazakhstan

Kosovo

Liechtenstein

Luxembourg

Montenegro

Moldova

Netherlands

Poland

Portugal

Republic of North Macedonia

Romania

Russia

Serbia

Slovakia

Slovenia

Spain

Switzerland

Türkiye

Ukraine

United States of America

Uzbekistan

China (heightened vessel surveillance only)

Japan (heightened vessel surveillance only)

Republic of Korea (heightened vessel surveillance only)

What is heightened vessel surveillance?

Heightened vessel surveillance applies to all roll-on roll-off (Ro-Ro) vessels that have berthed, loaded or transhipped from target risk countries (with the addition of China, Japan and Republic of Korea) between 1 September and 30 June. These vessels will be subject to a mandatory seasonal pest (SP) inspection on arrival in Australian territory. This is only applicable to the Ro-Ro vessels themselves and does not apply to goods on the vessel.

What are target high risk goods?

Goods that fall within the following tariff classifications have been categorised as target high risk goods and will require mandatory treatment for BMSB.

Target high risk goods shipped as break bulk cargo, in open top containers, on flat rack containers, or in modified containers will require mandatory offshore treatment for BMSB.

Untreated break bulk (including flat rack and open top containers) will be directed for export. Where these goods are identified before a vessel arrives in Australia, they will be denied discharge.

Target high risk tariffs

44 - Wood and articles of wood; wood charcoal

45 - Cork and articles of cork

57 - Carpets and other textile floor coverings

68 - Articles of stone, plaster, cement, asbestos, mica or similar materials

69 - Ceramic products – including sub chapters I and II

70 - Glass and glass ware

72 - Iron and steel - including sub chapters I, II, III, IV

73 - Articles of iron or steel

74 - Copper and articles thereof

75 - Nickel and articles thereof

76 - Aluminium and articles thereof

78 - Lead and articles thereof

79 - Zinc and articles thereof

80 - Tin and articles thereof

81 - Other base metals; cermets; articles thereof

82 - Tools, implements, cutlery, spoons and forks, 
of base metal; parts thereof of base metal

83 - Miscellaneous articles of base metals

84 - Nuclear reactors, boilers, machinery and mechanical appliances; parts thereof

85 - Electrical machinery and equipment and parts thereof; sound recorders and reproducers, television image and sound recorders and reproducers, and parts and accessories of such articles

86 - Railway or tramway locomotives, rolling-stock and parts thereof; railway or tramway track fixtures and fittings and parts thereof; mechanical (including electro-mechanical) traffic signalling equipment of all kinds

87 - Vehicles other than railway or tramway rolling-stock, and parts and accessories thereof

88 - Aircraft, spacecraft, and parts thereof

89 - Ships, boats and floating structures

What are target risk goods?

Goods that fall within the following tariff classifications have been categorised as target risk goods and although they will not require mandatory treatment, will be subject to random inspection.

Target risk tariffs

27 – Mineral fuels, mineral oils, and products of their distillation; bituminous substances; mineral waxes

28 – Inorganic chemicals; organic or inorganic compounds of precious metals, of rare-earth metals, of radioactive elements or of isotopes including sub chapters I, II, III, IV and V

29 – Organic chemicals, including sub chapters I, II, III, IV, V, VI, VII, VIII, IX, X, XII and XIII

38 – Miscellaneous chemical products

39 – Plastics and articles thereof, including sub chapters I and II

40 – Rubber and articles thereof

48 – Paper and paperboard; articles of paper pulp, of paper or of paperboard

49 – Printed books, newspapers, pictures, and other products of the printing industry; manuscripts, typescripts,
and plans

56 – Wadding, felt and nonwovens; special yarns; twine, cordage, ropes and cables and articles thereof

All other goods not listed

All other goods that are not categorised as target high risk and target risk goods, BMSB seasonal measures do not apply. However, these goods may be subject to BMSB measures if they are part of a container or consignment that contains target high risk or target risk goods.

Managing expected onshore delays

Importers should note the policy to allow onshore treatment of containers may result in increased clearance delays at the border. To minimise this, industry is encouraged to have their target risk goods treated offshore where possible.

See. Secure. Report.

Seen something unusual? Report it, even if you are not sure.

Pests and diseases can spread quickly over large distances, so it is essential that you report what you find as soon as possible.

If you see something that could have entered Australia with imported goods, secure the goods and report it by phoning 1800 798 636 or completing the online form available on agriculture.gov.au.

More information

Visit agriculture.gov.au/bmsb for:

seasonal measures for BMSB.

preparing to import BMSB goods.

what happens to your goods on arrival?

a list of target risk countries for BMSB.

a complete list of goods categorised as ‘target high risk’ and ‘target risk’.

Watch the hitchhiker pest webinar series available at agriculture.gov.au.

Email HPP@aff.gov.au for policy related queries.

Visit agriculture.gov.au/subscribe to subscribe to newsletter and Industry Advice Notices and keep up to date on changes to import requirements, including updates to BMSB seasonal measures.