BMSB Seasonal Measures

For the Brown Marmorated Stink Bug (BMSB) risk season the BMSB seasonal measures will apply to:

Targeted goods manufactured in and/or shipped from target risk countries between 1 September and 30 April (inclusive).

Vessels that berth, load or tranship from target risk countries within this period.

Note: The ‘shipped on board date’ (as indicated on the Ocean Bill of Lading) will be used to determine when goods have been shipped. ‘Gate in’ dates and times will not be accepted.

Goods subject to the measures

A Full list of the tariffs subject to the measures is available at agriculture.gov.au/bmsb.

Goods categorised as target high risk will require mandatory treatment.

Goods categorised as target risk may be subject to random onshore inspection.

All other goods are not subject to BMSB intervention.

Treatment requirements

Containerised cargo (6 hard sided)

Containerised cargo arriving in sealed six hard sided containers with target high risk goods can be treated offshore, or onshore at the container level. The department recommends offshore treatment for containers subject to BMSB measures to aide in faster border clearances upon arrival.

Break bulk consignments (including flat rack and open top containers)

Mandatory offshore treatment of target high risk goods shipped as break bulk cargo, including goods shipped in open top containers or on flat rack containers, will be required. Untreated break bulk will be denied discharge and be directed for export on arrival.

Note: Goods treated in a target risk country must be treated by an approved treatment provider registered under AusTreat.

120 hour post treatment window

Containerised cargo

Containerised goods treated in a target risk country prior to 1 December, must be loaded into a six hard sided container and sealed within 120 hours of treatment completion. A sealing declaration can be provided if required.

Breakbulk consignments (including flat rack and open top containers)

Break bulk (including flat racks and open top containers) treated prior to 1 December in a target risk country, must be loaded onto a vessel for export within 120 hours of treatment completion.

Note: The post treatment window does NOT apply to goods treated in a non-target risk country, or to goods treated from 1 December (inclusive).

More information

Visit agriculture.gov.au/bmsb for:

seasonal measures for BMSB.

preparing to import BMSB goods.

what happens to your goods on arrival?

a list of target risk countries for BMSB.

a complete list of goods categorised as ‘target high risk’ and ‘target risk’.

Watch the hitchhiker pest webinar series available at agriculture.gov.au.

Email HPP@aff.gov.au for policy related queries.

Visit agriculture.gov.au/subscribe to subscribe to newsletter and Industry Advice Notices and keep up to date on changes to import requirements, including updates to BMSB seasonal measures.