The 2021 Independent Review of the Pesticides and 

Veterinary Medicines Regulatory System in Australia 

What do the proposed changes mean for…  

CHEMICAL COMPANIES? 

As an independent Panel, we have reviewed the Australian pesticides and veterinary medicines 

regulatory system. We have recommended changes that will improve the way you manufacture and 

supply pesticides and veterinary medicines in Australia. 

Our recommended changes will help you to: 

• 

Be more competitive in the Australian market. The introduction of a licensing scheme for 

internationally registered products will provide an alternative pathway to allow you to 

introduce chemical products currently registered in certain overseas markets without 

seeking full Australian registration (Recommendation 36). 

• 

Access more sources of active constituents. Active constituents will be approved at the 

substance level, independent of the site of manufacture. This will make it easier to source 

active constituents, providing your business with resilience and flexibility (Recommendation 

48). 

• 

Add uses to labels more easily. Filling the gap between permits and registrations, 

supplemental labels will allow new and minor uses to be added to registered products, 

increasing your market access (Recommendation 41).   

• 

Get your products on the market faster. The introduction of lower regulatory pathways for 

lower risk products, and fast-tracked generic/priority applications will reduce the time taken 

to register these chemical products (Recommendation 42). 

• 

Access a national sales market. The introduction of a national licensing scheme for 

applicators, and consistent rules for using and supplying pesticides and veterinary medicines 

will make it easier for you to supply products in different states and territories 

(Recommendation 19). 

• 

Simplify your product labels. When designing or updating your product labels, you will have 

more flexibility on wording and presentation and be able to provide information 

electronically (Recommendation 24). 

Other benefits that will improve the system and the chemical manufacturing industry include: 

• 

Changes to data protection periods. Data provided for veterinary medicine applications to 

the APVMA will now have the same period of protection as data for pesticide product 

applications, providing consistency across the system (Recommendation 46).

• 

Allowing assessments by accredited assessors. Introducing a pool of accredited assessors 

will allow you to have more control over your assessment timeframes (Recommendation 

49). 

• 

Providing consistent advice to your users. Under the single national law reform, rules for 

using pesticides and veterinary medicines will become consistent across Australia, making it 

easier for you to provide advice to users (Recommendation 43). 

• 

Simplify adverse experience reporting. The process for reporting adverse experiences 

associated with your products will be streamlined, reducing the time taken to submit reports 

(Recommendation 13). 

Find out more about our recommendations by reading the final report or visiting 

haveyoursay.awe.gov.au/agvet-chemicals-regulatory-reform.  

Not part of a chemical company? View our other resources that might be relevant to you.