The 2021 Independent Review of the Pesticides and 

Veterinary Medicines Regulatory System in Australia 

What do the proposed changes mean for…  

COMMUNITY GROUPS? 

As an independent Panel, we have reviewed the Australian pesticides and veterinary medicines 

regulatory system. We have recommended changes to strengthen and maintain a resilient and 

effective regulatory system for Australia. 

We recognise the importance of protecting the health of humans, animals, plants, and ecosystems. 

To ensure this underpins all future work in the regulatory system, we have proposed a new vision 

and objectives that reflect these priorities. 

Our recommendations include many changes that will help protect humans, animals, plants, and 

ecosystems, including: 

• 

The opportunity for you to have a national voice. The establishment of stakeholder forums 

will allow for your views and ideas on chemical use in Australia to be heard 

(Recommendation 10). 

• 

Increased monitoring and surveillance. Nation-wide environmental monitoring will examine 

pesticides in our soil and waterways, while a domestic produce monitoring program will test 

for pesticide and veterinary medicine residue in produce destined for human and animal 

consumption (Recommendation 12).  

• 

Regular public reporting. The new Commissioner for Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines 

will undertake whole-of-system reporting every 2 years, increasing transparency of trends, 

statistics, and regulatory decisions (Recommendation 8). 

• 

A humaneness score on product labels. This score will help consumers make informed 

decisions by telling them how humane a vertebrate pest control product is when compared 

to other products available for the same use (Recommendation 17). 

• 

Increased transparency of chemical reviews. A new legislated trigger will improve the 

effectiveness and transparency of the review process. The trigger will require the APVMA to 

undertake a review if a comparable international regulator has made a final, science-based 

regulatory decision as a result of a review within the last 3 years. The APVMA would be 

required to publish the reasons for not commencing its own review under this trigger 

(Recommendation 14). 

• 

Streamlined adverse experience reporting. If a person, animal, or crop experiences an 

unintended adverse reaction to a pesticide or veterinary medicine, there will be one central 

place to lodge a report and view subsequent outcomes (Recommendation 13).

Other recommended changes to improve the system include: 

• 

Improved access to label information. The introduction of a smart labelling system allows 

label and use information to be updated instantaneously and in multiple languages. This 

ensures that users have the most up to date information, meaning risk to humans, animals 

and the environment is better managed (Recommendation 24). 

• 

National leadership. The new Commissioner for Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines will 

provide national leadership, increased transparency and will keep you informed on issues 

you want to know about (Recommendation 7). 

Find out more about our recommendations by reading the final report or visiting 

haveyoursay.awe.gov.au/agvet-chemicals-regulatory-reform.  

Not part of a community group? View our other resources that might be relevant to you.