In-water cleaning removes biofouling from submerged surfaces of vessels or other structures. It includes hull grooming, propeller cleaning or polishing and cleaning of niche areas.
Release of biofouling and toxicants can spread invasive aquatic species and pathogens. This impacts the aquatic environment, water quality and human health.
The Australian anti-fouling and in-water cleaning guidelines (exposure draft)
The Australian anti-fouling and in-water cleaning guidelines offer best-practice guidance on:
- application, maintenance, removal and disposal of anti-fouling coatings
- cleaning of biofouling on vessels and movable structures in Australia.
The guidelines also contain the in-water cleaning standards. These standards give regulators a voluntary decision-making framework. This helps them assess the biosecurity and chemical contamination risks of in-water cleaning in Australian territorial seas.
Exposure draft
An exposure draft of the guidelines is now available while we continue to consult with relevant regulators on a voluntary decision-making framework to support their assessment of in-water cleaning risks.
The legislative framework of in-water cleaning is location specific. It is a shared responsibility between relevant government agencies and port authorities. They decide whether service providers are allowed to operate in their area.
The Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water (DCCEEW) has commenced a four-month public comment period to gather feedback on the exposure draft. The submission form is available on the Water Quality website and should be submitted via email to waterquality@dcceew.gov.au.
The deadline for submissions is 1 March 2025.
Download
Exposure draft: Australian anti-fouling and in-water cleaning guidelines (PDF 911 KB)
Exposure draft: Australian anti-fouling and in-water cleaning guidelines (DOCX 2.3 MB)
If you have difficulty accessing these files, visit web accessibility for assistance.
Requests to in-water clean in Australia
The approval process to conduct in-water cleaning or treatment in Australian waters is complex. The application process varies between locations and can involve many government agencies and port authorities. They will consider the biosecurity and toxicant risks and impacts the activity may have on the environment.
Contact authorities for permission to clean your vessel in state or territory waters. It is important you give authorities enough time to consider your request before your proposed cleaning activity.
State and territory contacts
Contact the relevant state or territory authority for advice on cleaning your vessel:
New South Wales
Department of Primary Industries
Email Aquatic Biosecurity
Port Authority of NSW
Email Shipping Manager
Northern Territory
Department of Primary Industry and Fisheries
Email Aquatic Biosecurity
Queensland
Department of Agriculture and Fisheries
Email Biosecurity Queensland
Phone 13 25 23
Email Department of Environment and Heritage Protection
Phone 13 74 68
Also contact the Port Authority, harbour master or Maritime Safety Queensland. This depends on location of proposed clean.
South Australia
Primary Industries and Regions SA
Website Biofouling and Ballast Water
Email Biosecurity
Phone (08) 8429 0823
Email Environment Protection Authority SA
Phone (08) 8204 2004 or 1800 623 445
Department of Environment and Water SA
Phone: (+61 8) 8204 1910
Tasmania
Biosecurity Tasmania - Department of Natural Resources and Environment Tasmania
Email Biosecurity TAS or Invasive Species
Phone (03) 6169 9021 or (03) 6165 3777
TasPorts
Email Reception
1300 366 742
EPA Tasmania
Incident Response Officer
Email Incident Response
Phone 1800 005 171
Victoria
Department of Energy, Environment and Climate Action
Email Marine Pests
Western Australia
Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development (DPIRD) – Aquatic Pest Biosecurity Group
Vessel Management enquiries
Email Vessel Management
General Aquatic Pest Biosecurity enquiries
Email Aquatic Biosecurity
Phone (08) 9203 0111
DPIRD only assess the pest biosecurity risk. Contact the relevant harbour master/port authority for cleaning in declared port areas.
Contact other relevant authorities for advice on contaminant release or discharges.
Great Barrier Reef Marine Park
For all in-water cleaning related activities contact:
Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority
Email Assessments and Permissions