LIVESTOCK MOVEMENT IN AUSTRALIA 
AND EMERGENCY DISEASE 
PREPAREDNESS 
 
The Office of the Chief Veterinary Officer (OCVO) within the Australian 
Government Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry has the responsibility 
for coordinating national emergency animal disease preparedness and responses.  
Management of infectious animal diseases may be complicated by the regular 
movement of livestock throughout Australia because this movement offers the 
potential for rapid spread of infectious disease. Successful planning for and 
management of infectious disease relies on good understanding of ‘normal movement 
patterns’, the rapid identification and tracing of animal movements from infected 
premises and the prevention of further animal or animal product movement capable of 
spreading disease. 
 
The Australian Government’s “Securing the Future” initiative was used to fund the 
DAFF project “Emergency Animal Disease/Emerging Disease Awareness” designed 
to collect information on contemporary management practices including buying and 
selling patterns in a range of Australian animal industries. As part of this initiative, 
OCVO commissioned a series of studies which provide qualitative information about 
the structure, animal husbandry practices and livestock movements of five livestock 
industries ─ sheep, pigs, beef cattle, dairy and commercial poultry ─ and the saleyard 
industry. To facilitate the study of the structure and dynamics of the livestock 
industries, Australia was divided into 12 regions in which industry practices and 
movement patterns were similar (see map below). These regions are based on 
aggregations of the 33 survey areas used by the Australian Bureau of Agricultural and 
Resource Economics (ABARE) for their sheep and cattle surveys.  
 
 
Map of aggregated ABARE regions 
 
Page 1

National farm surveys are conducted annually by ABARE, which maps this data 
using Statistical Divisions (SDs) as the basis for presentation. Statistical Divisions are 
intended to be relatively homogeneous areas within which there are identifiable social 
and economic links among populations. The maps presented at the Statistical Division 
level present indicators derived from ABARE data that are obtained by sample rather 
than census. 
 
The information provided by the commissioned reports can be used in a range of 
applications but is particularly important for understanding and managing potential 
infectious animal diseases.  A ‘snapshot’ of the findings of each of the studies is 
provided here. Links to the full reports are also provided. 
   
 
SNAPSHOT 1 
Structure and Dynamics of Australia’s Sheep 
Population 
 
The full study identifies and maps geographic regions and production sectors across 
Australia and documents movements of sheep within and between regions.  The study 
reports sheep movements in terms of the number and size of consignments, the season 
of movement, the type of source or destination (saleyard, abattoir, live export etc) and 
the destination/source regions from/to for  “typical” farms in each region.   
 
The national sheep flock was estimated in 
2006 at 104 million, with two thirds of 
these sheep located in Regions 9, 10b and 
12b as shown in Figure 1. These three 
regions have a largely Mediterranean 
climate that is favorable for the production 
of improved annual pastures and is 
suitable for cropping. Around 50 per cent 
of these sheep properties also run cattle. 
 
10a
12b
12a
10b
9
11
7
3
124
6
5
8
Figure 1  Sheep regions 
 
The national sheep flock was dissected 
into five discrete production sectors (see 
Figure 2): 
 
1) Self replacing wool (SRW) This sector breeds its own ewe replacements with 
sheep sales comprising surplus young wethers and cull for age (CFA) sheep.  
Replacement rams are the only sheep 
purchase. 
 
SRW
54%
SRM
25%
W
6%
XB
3%
TO
12%
2) Self replacing meat (SRM) Very similar 
in structure to the self replacing wool 
sector with a reduced focus on wool 
quality and an emphasis on carcass 
attributes.   
 
Figure 2 Sheep numbers by production sector 
Page 2

3) Wether based (W) In this sector wethers represent more than 50 per cent of 
opening and closing sheep numbers.  Replacement wethers are purchased with 
Cull for age wethers sold. 
4) Crossbred (XB) Exists where crossbred ewes represent more than 30 per cent 
of ewes mated. 
 
5) Trading & Other (TO) This sector consists of the sheep not belonging to any 
of the above sectors, includes sheep feedlots. 
 
Sheep movements in terms of size and timing are driven primarily by the type of 
production sector involved. For example, 78 per cent of the national flock is involved 
in self replacing breeding systems where the only movements onto those properties 
will be stud rams and the only significant movement off the property will be cull for 
age (CFA) rams and ewes and surplus young sheep (hoggets or lambs).  
Sheep movements are mostly restricted to within a 200 km radius from where they 
were born and bred. For stud animals, this radius of movement might extend to 
500 km. 
 
Droughts, recovery from droughts and large seasonal differentials will significantly 
increase the distances and number of sheep moved compared to a “normal” season. 
These factors drive the economics of the sale/purchase so that larger margins cover 
the increased travel costs. High value sheep, transport efficiencies and favourable 
commodity prices will also increase the distance sheep move. 
 
The geographic distribution of sheep studs, sale yards and live export centers impact 
on the size and number of consignments. The decline in the number of sheep studs 
and abattoirs, the increasing popularity of sale mechanisms alternate to sale yards 
(including internet based auctions), seasonal conditions and favorable prices results in 
sheep traveling further than they have in the past. 
 
The key factor influencing sheep movement is economics and, with a small profit 
margin for most sheep production sectors, the distances sheep move will tend to be 
small. Other factors driving sheep 
movements include: 
 
o technology and the ability 
to transport sheep less 
expensively. 
o flock 
structure/breeding 
systems 
(ie. 
crossbred 
systems need to buy in 
replacement 
ewes 
and 
trading 
systems 
by 
definition buy and sell a 
variety of sheep classes 
throughout the year). 
o disease (such as footrot). 
Disease is more likely to be 
a limiting factor on a 
Figure 3 Significant patterns of movement. 
12a
11
10a
3
6
124
9
8
5
12b
10b
7
Page 3

local/regional scale as opposed to a national scale). 
o seasons (movement to agistment) 
o commodity price cycles 
o droughts and recovery from drought (sales to abattoirs and re-stocking). 
 
The significant patterns of sheep movement are shown in Figure 3.  
 
West to East - Prime lamb and stud sheep from WA (Regions 12a & 12b) to the 
eastern states – around 100 000 prime lambs annually, nearly all to abattoirs. Up to 
25 000 store lambs also move to Wagga Wagga (Region 9) for sale in an average 
year. Actual numbers will be very dependent on relative seasonal conditions. 
Movement is driven by marketing to a price advantage and the lack of prime lamb 
processing facilities in the west. 
 
East to West - There is very limited movement East to West and restricted to mainly 
stud stock. 
 
North to South – the general movement of sheep in the eastern states is from north to 
south – driven by access to the major saleyard and abattoir facilities. Re-stocker sheep 
also move from Queensland into NSW when seasonal conditions in the two regions 
permit. 
 
South to North – store lambs move from Region 11 to Region 10b – numbers are 
driven by relative seasonal conditions, prices and a lack of processing capacity – 
around 250 000 (or one third of the Tasmanian lamb drop) lambs move on average 
during the summer months.  These movements are facilitated by the Bass Strait stock 
transportation subsidy and are contingent on seasonal conditions being different 
between Victoria and Tasmania.  
 
 
SNAPSHOT 2  
Structure and Dynamics of Australia’s Commercial 
Poultry and Ratite Industries  
 
This study was commissioned to develop a rational classification of the Australian 
poultry industry taking into account geographical, production system and marketing 
factors. Commercial chicken, duck, turkey, ratite (emu and ostrich), squab (pigeon), 
quail and gamebird industries were approached to provide specific information on 
farm structure, bird type, inputs, outputs and horizontal contacts such as feed, litter 
and dead bird movements which may be important in the spread of infection between 
farms, industry sectors and regions. ‘Typical’ production enterprises are described 
within each industry sector as well as the number and structure of birds and any 
production practices that significantly affect the number, density and mixing of birds.  
 
For each of the poultry sectors, the frequency, timing, direction and source/destination 
of bird movements that occur on and off ‘typical’ farms is presented. Factors that may 
influence the establishment of farms and the buying and selling of poultry and ratites 
are also identified. 
 
Page 4

Structure of the Australian poultry and ratite industries 
 
The national poultry and ratite flocks is divided into 10 sectors. These are: 
 
o The chicken meat industry 
o The chicken egg layer industry 
o The specific pathogen free (SPF) egg and chicken industry 
o The duck industry 
o The turkey industry 
o The ratite industries 
o The squab industry 
o The quail industry 
o The game bird industry 
o The “niche” poultry industries 
 
Production areas 
 
The density of chicken meat and egg farms, turkey farms and duck farms is shown in 
Figure 4. 
 
 
Page 5

Figure 4 Density of poultry farms
Page 6

Dynamics of poultry and ratite production 
 
Vertical integration 
 
The degree of vertical integration between the various chicken meat companies varies 
considerably. Completely integrated companies have their own genetic breeding 
stock, parent breeders, hatcheries, broiler grow out, processing plants, rendering 
facilities and feed mills. 
 
At the next level of integration, companies purchase parent breeders and feed supply 
but are otherwise vertically integrated. Some partially integrated companies may also 
purchase fertile hatching eggs and day old chicks. 
 
Finally, what are known as ‘live sales customers’ purchase live poultry to slaughter in 
their own plants and distribute to their customers. This is not a small sector of the 
market, being in some states responsible for over 10 per cent of all processed broilers. 
 
All-in all-out production  
 
All meat chicken and around 85 per cent of turkey grow-out farms are single age. 
Although the majority of farms in the duck industry generally have multiple ages of 
birds on site, the industry as a whole is increasingly recognising the health advantages 
of having single age grow-out farms. 
 
The egg layer industry still has a large number of multi-age farms. Typically these 
layer farms will rear pullets on-site and have a number of ages of birds in production 
to enable them to achieve a uniform supply of eggs to the market. With the emergence 
of several large integrators in the egg industry there has been a progressive move to 
single age farms with off-site rearing. The high incidence of Marek’s disease in the 
early 1990s was one of the factors that influenced this change away from multi-age 
farms. The remaining poultry industries all operate as multi-age farms and in some 
cases multi-age sheds. 
 
Movement of livestock and fertile eggs  
 
The livestock and product movements for the chicken meat and egg layer industries is 
extensive with large numbers of live birds and eggs moving great distances all over 
Australia on a daily basis. Day-old chick trucks can transport up to 80 000 birds at a 
time while live bird cartage trucks carry between 4000 to 7000 birds depending on the 
weight of the bird. To depopulate a 100 000-bird layer farm, extensive vehicular 
movements are required.  
 
All types of live poultry are commonly transported for long distances over one or two 
state borders. Day old chicks (DOCs) move in their hundreds of thousands between 
states each week within Australia, in sealed controlled environment trucks. Reared 
birds are not uncommonly moved between states in open sided trucks. Turkey eggs 
and poults are also frequently moved interstate. 
 
There is no particular geographical pattern to poultry livestock and product 
movements within Australia. While there are records kept by the chicken meat, layer 
Page 7

and turkey industries on their livestock movements which would readily allow 
traceability in the event of a disease incursion, such information for the niche 
industries is less readily available. The ostrich industry does keep detailed records on 
production and bird movements as this is an export requirement of the European 
Union. 
 
The level of live poultry or poultry product movements within national companies 
between states, between different companies or between processing plants is quite 
extensive in the Australian market. 
 
Potential for disease transmission  
 
Horizontal contacts between farms, industry sectors and regions 
 
Identified mechanisms for contact across industry sector flocks and farms included: 
o live bird cartage  
o movement of eggs and egg fillers 
o beak trimming and vaccination contractors 
o litter supply and manure/used litter disposal contractors 
o non-company and maintenance personnel 
o farm sanitation 
o dead bird and egg disposal contractors 
o rendering of waste materials 
o abattoirs/processing plants that process more than one species 
o feed manufacture and delivery vehicles 
o agricultural shows (the commercial poultry sector has essentially no 
contact with agricultural shows) 
o live bird markets 
o facility builders, suppliers of basic materials (including husbandry 
equipment) 
o surface water used by poultry and ratite farms. 
 
Mixed species farming 
 
The game bird, quail and speciality poultry operators are more likely to farm a variety 
of poultry species than the other poultry industry sectors. 
 
The integrated companies in the meat chicken, turkey and duck industries use in-
house written or informal biosecurity plans that prohibit the keeping of other poultry 
on the premises and this is enforced on contracted growers. In the small and mixed 
poultry enterprises there is mixing and matching poultry species; this mixing of 
species helps owners to market specialist products to niche markets. The species in 
the niche enterprises most likely to be mixed on farm are chickens, ducks, turkeys, 
and quail. Often there will be a small processing plant on site or in close association 
with the venture in order to limit the necessity of live bird movements off these mixed 
species poultry sites.  
 
 
 
 
Page 8

Seasonal factors 
 
Seasonal factors have a minimal influence on the overall poultry industry dynamics. 
Game bird and ratite breeding is seasonal and this affects the slaughter and processing 
dates. The increased demand for fresh turkey meat at Christmas results in increased 
placements to align with Christmas slaughter.  
 
Current state governments do not consider flocks of less than 1000 birds as 
commercial flocks and as such they are exempt from many regulatory requirements 
such as Newcastle disease vaccination. These small flocks account for up to 10 per 
cent of Australia’s table egg production ─ this production being seasonal with 
production peaking in spring and early summer.  
 
 
SNAPSHOT 3 
Structure and Dynamics of Australia’s Pig Meat 
Industry 
 
The full report identifies and describes all relevant sectors and production systems 
within the Australian pig meat industry and details their standard operating practices 
including the number, type and structure of livestock present on typical (i.e. 
representative) farms of each sector.   
 
Figure 5 Density of pigs in Australia 
 
 
 
Page 9

Industry & Production Sectors 
 
Industry 
& 
Production Sectors 
Size/numbers 
Geographic Location & Dynamics 
seed stock 
producers/suppliers
About five seed stock 
suppliers provide 
most of the breeding 
stock to the 
Australian industry. 
There are 24 seed 
stock suppliers in 
Australia. There are 
no seed stock 
suppliers in Tasmania 
and the Northern 
Territory. 
In any one month a single seed stock 
producer could ship male or female 
breeding stock to about 38 farms in five 
states. Similarly a seed stock 
multiplication herd in WA could 
receive genes by AI from Queensland 
and that herd distribute breeding stock 
over the course of the next month to ten 
farms in WA. Breeding pigs move 
commonly between states on a weekly, 
fortnightly or monthly basis. 
 
AI/semen Centres 
12 in Australia. These 
12 centres transport, 
in total, semen to an 
estimated 315 farms. 
There are no commercial semen centres 
in Tasmania or the Northern Territory 
while there are five in Queensland. In 
any one week one semen centre 
transports semen to between 40 and 80 
herds 
Outdoor farms 
The outdoor sow 
population is 
estimated at about 
15,000–18,000 sows.  
 
Environmental degradation factors 
combined with high summer 
temperatures and seasonal infertility 
restrict populations of outdoor pigs 
generally to coastal areas near Albany 
and areas in Southern Victoria. 
Pig farms 
There were a total of 
329 129 sows in 
Australia in 2005.  
See Figure 5 for the state distribution 
of this population. 
Abattoirs 
18 in Australia. See 
full report for further 
details. 
Most of the abattoirs restrict their kill to 
pigs from their own or neighboring 
states. The South Australian abattoirs 
draw from southern NSW as well as SA 
and Victoria. Abattoirs will draw from 
a wider catchment occasionally. 
Contractors 
In 2005 there were 
472 producers in 
contracting 
arrangements.  
Contractors are concentrated in NSW, 
VIC and QLD. 
 
Farm Structure/Production Models 
 
Fully integrated - Company owns farms, pigs, a feed mill and an abattoir.  
 
Multi-site systems - Large populations of pigs are not well-tolerated in many areas so 
farms have developed specialized sites: sows on one site, weaners on another and 
growers and finishing pigs on another, or any combination of these. 
 
Page 10

Contracting systems - The precise arrangements vary but, in brief, one party 
provides the labour and housing facilities and the other provides the feed, the pigs, 
technical knowledge and sells or slaughters the pigs.  
 
Farrow-to-finish 
This is the conventional structure of intensive pig farms. In this 
model the farm breeds, farrows, weans and grows out its own pigs for sale.  
 
Weaner producers - Weaner farms are popular for contracting businesses. The 
profitability of a farm producing just weaner pigs is lower than one selling finishing 
pigs so it is unusual for people who own both their pigs and buildings to produce only 
weaner pigs.  
 
Finisher producers – These are farms where pigs older than 8-10 weeks are grown-
out until sale. Finisher farm sites also lend themselves well to contracting schemes. 
They are often situated on grain farms that have space, surplus labour and can use the 
effluent on crops.  
 
 
Movement Dynamics 
 
Seasonal factors - Over the November to February period fewer pigs are sold 
compared with other months because of the impact of seasonal factors (mostly 
temperature) on fertility. 
 
Mechanisms for horizontal contact between farms 
 
• Contact with feral animals (pigs, goats) 
• Aerosol spread from neighbouring properties  
• Live pig markets 
• Saleyards 
• Agricultural shows 
• Abattoirs 
• Live animal transport (pig transport vehicles) 
• Semen/AI centres 
• Staff and visitor movement 
• Movement of veterinarians and technicians 
• Disposal of dead stock and effluent 
 
Establishments with pigs and other livestock 
 
Eighty-five per cent of pig farms carry ruminants. Sheep in particular are often kept in 
very close proximity to the pigs because they are used to trim grass between sheds. In 
addition, effluent is sprayed onto pastures that both sheep and cattle graze. 
 
Agricultural Shows  
 
Pigs were exhibited at 46 agricultural shows in Australia in 2005. A high number of 
pigs (1196) were exhibited at agricultural shows in 2005 by a large number of 
exhibitors (86). A number of animal husbandry practices at and prior to/after 
agricultural shows were identified as posing a potential disease spread risk for pigs. 
Page 11

Live pig markets 
 
Live pig markets exist in most states of Australia. It is estimated that approximately 5 
per cent of pigs in Australia are sold live by auction at public saleyards. The highest 
proportion of pigs sold are baconers. The report found that pigs can move a long 
distance to and from saleyards — including interstate.  
 
Key findings 
 
• Replacement breeding stock travel long distances to farms but on an infrequent 
basis. 
• Most producers moved live animals off their farms to saleyards and/or to other 
farms. 
• Disease risk is reduced by industry marketing practices whereby relatively few 
slaughter pigs are sold through saleyards. An estimated 95 per cent of the pigs are 
sold direct to slaughter, the remainder being sold through saleyards.  
• However, each week hundreds of breeding gilts and boars are moved from seed 
stock producers to customer herds. Currently about 12 seed stock herds supply 
breeding stock to an estimated 80 per cent of the national herd. 
• Thousands of pigs are moved from site to site in two site or multi-site pig 
production enterprises each week. For example, in one business about 8 000 pigs 
move weekly from three sow sites to a grow-out site.  
• Multi-site production systems, contract production and outdoor systems have 
become part of the mainstream pig industry. For example, there are about 475 
establishments engaged in contract production nationally. 
• The use of artificial insemination is increasing and an estimated 60–70 per cent of 
matings on Australian farms are AI matings. 
• On farrow-to-finish farms about 50 per cent of the breeding herd is culled each 
year and many of these animals are sold in regional saleyards. 
 
 
SNAPSHOT 4 
Structure and Dynamics of Australia’s Beef Industry 
 
The full study provides details about the Australian beef cattle population with respect 
to aggregations and movements. It quantifies the beef cattle population on a regional 
basis and describes trends in its demographics. The study also describes how and why 
cattle move between regions during a typical production year, driven by social, 
economic and seasonal influences.   
 
Classification of Australia’s beef cattle industry 
 
The Australian beef industry has been classified into 12 different Beef Regions based 
on production intensity, climate and topography and into six complementary 
Production Sectors according to different enterprises and degrees of specialisation 
(see below). To a very large extent, the Regions are based on aggregations of the 
Page 12

statistical regions used by ABARE for the purpose of collecting farm survey data. 
Figure 6 indicates the distribution of beef cattle by Beef Region. 
 
 
Figure 6 
 
Production Sectors 
 
The major production sectors within the beef industry are defined as follows: 
A. Specialised breeding – enterprises breeding cattle destined for sale at weaning. 
B. Breeding and growing – enterprises breeding cattle that are carried beyond 
weaning and destined for sale as store yearling cattle to be finished at a feedlot or 
specialist finisher. 
C. Breeding and finishing – enterprises breeding cattle that are carried beyond 
weaning and finished for sale for slaughter, generally for the domestic market. 
D. Specialised growing and backgrounding – enterprises that purchase or transfer-
in weaner or yearling steers for growing-out to weights required by specialised 
finishers or lot feeders. 
E. Specialised finishing on pastures – enterprises that purchase store stock for the 
purpose of finishing them to domestic or export market specifications on pasture. 
F. Specialised finishing in feedlots – enterprises that purchase or transfer-in cattle 
for the purpose of finishing on high energy grain-based diets to meet domestic or 
export market specifications. Some specialised lot-feeders are vertically integrated 
providing product direct to retail outlets in Japan. 
 
Within this report the features of each Beef Region and of each Production Sector are 
described in detail including the factors that are important in the management of cattle 
enterprises in the different sectors. 
 
 
 
Page 13

Cattle population and aggregations in each region 
 
Identified sites to which beef cattle move, aggregate and disperse in one form or 
another include saleyards, feedlots, ports (for live export), agricultural shows and 
abattoirs. Despite the importance of feedlots, inter-property sales and direct 
consignment to slaughter, saleyards continue to be critical points of contact and 
dispersal in the cattle industry with an average throughput of about 6 million head 
annually.  
 
Saleyards accumulate stock from a wide range of areas and disperse them over large 
distances, as well as facilitating exchange of ownership. Exchange of ownership 
through a saleyard can result in the cattle going to slaughter or it might result in them 
being transported to a new region and production sector. 
 
In the course of a normal production year, cattle move within and between regions in 
a predictable pattern. In the full report these patterns and their scale have been 
described by sex and age group and the points of origin and destination traced. 
Interstate movements of cattle have also been analysed by year and Beef Region. 
 
Factors driving change to beef cattle demographics and movement 
 
Key drivers of change identified include: 
 
• disease eradication (e.g. bovine tuberculosis) 
• the infusion of environmentally-adapted breeds 
• selection for meat quality 
• improved transportation and communications 
• integration of large northern cattle operations 
• expansion of lot feeding 
• opening of large export markets in Japan and Korea (for high quality beef) and 
   South East Asia (for live cattle)  
• extensive land development (aimed at improving the environmental 
sustainability of cattle production). 
• land values and alternative uses. 
 
These have resulted in greater integration of the Australian cattle industry both 
geographically and across the various stages of the production cycle (breeding, 
growing and finishing). 
 
 
SNAPSHOT 5 
Structure and Dynamics of Australia’s Dairy Industry 
 
The full study reports on the Australian dairy cattle population with respect to 
aggregations and movements, while also classifying the dairy cattle population on a 
regional basis and describing trends in its demographics. In contrast to the beef 
industry study, this study highlights that there are relatively few long-distance 
movements of dairy cattle. Most movements tend to be within the local region, or 
Page 14

between adjoining regions where herds are located close to regional boundaries. The 
features of each Region and of each Production Sector are described in detail 
including the factors that are important in the management of dairy enterprises in the 
different sectors. 
 
Classification of Australia’s dairy cattle industry 
 
The Australian dairy industry has been classified into Dairy Regions that correspond 
with the 12 different Beef Regions identified in Snapshot 4 of the beef industry study. 
Because of the clustering of the dairy industry in higher rainfall areas or areas with 
secure irrigation and feed supplies, only six of the original 12 Beef Regions were 
classified as Dairy Regions, while two additional regions include relatively small 
dairying areas. It should also be noted that the main dairying areas within each Region 
(see Figure 7 below) tend to be localised to a relatively small proportion of the 
Region, rather than being spread across the Region. 
 
Figure 7 
 
 
Production Sectors  
 
The industry was classified into five complementary Production Sectors according to 
different enterprises and seasonality of calving (see Table 1 below). 
 
 
 
Page 15

Dairy cattle population and aggregations in each region 
 
In some regions, movements are strongly seasonal with peaks at drying-off and 
calving. 
 
Additional data collected and reported on includes: 
 
• saleyards handling large numbers of dairy cattle in each Region 
• calf scales and collection points 
• bull beef and dairy-beef rearing 
• heifer rearing 
• shows and Special sales 
• abattoirs located in dairying areas 
• knackeries  
• live exports of dairy cattle. 
 
The six main Australian Regions and their constituent Production Sectors are 
described in detail in Table 4 of the full report. Each Production Sector in each 
Region is described under the following headings: 
 
• Herd structure 
• Turn-off patterns 
• Factors influencing turn-off 
• Drivers of change. 
 
Factors driving change 
 
Factors affecting dairying in individual Regions in the medium term are described in 
the report as well as factors affecting national change and long-term change. These 
factors include:  
Page 16

• restructuring of farm business 
• shortage of skilled labour 
• competition for cattle (export market) 
• competition for land and resources (other primary industries and urban 
migration) 
• consolidation at the processor level 
• the increase in domestic competition (driven by deregulation, supermarkets 
and imports from New Zealand)  
• the improving but volatile international markets. 
 
 
SNAPSHOT 6 
Structure and Dynamics of Australia’s Saleyard 
Industry 
 
The central purpose of this study was to collate, map and tabulate historical and recent 
data to define the movement of sheep, cattle (beef and dairy), pigs and horses through 
the saleyard network across Australia.  
 
Information collected about saleyards included:  
 
1. regularity, species and number of sales each year 
2. distance and direction of stock movements  
3. factors influencing vendor and buyer numbers at sales 
4. annual throughput in an “average” year, by species and class of animal  
5. issues about long term viability. 
 
One hundred and ninety four “operational” saleyards were identified across Australia. 
“Operational saleyards” were defined as those yards that have “predictable” sales, 
usually on a regular basis and with significant livestock throughput. Almost 40 per 
cent of the saleyards were located in NSW with another 40 per cent based in QLD and 
VIC (see Figure 8). Nearly all saleyards were located in the high rainfall and 
wheat/sheep zones on major arterial roads.  
 
Page 17

Figure 8 - Distribution of saleyards and proportion of annual sales by state  
 
During an “average” year some 19 million sheep and 6 million cattle are sold through 
the national saleyard network, with the majority of sheep (73%) and cattle (62%) 
being sold through NSW and Victorian saleyards.  
 
 
 
Seasonal conditions and the reputation of the saleyards are the most important drivers 
influencing which saleyards vendors send their stock to, and which yards buyers 
attend to purchase stock. Expected prices are also important drivers for vendors while 
it is the quantity and reputation of the livestock that motivate buyers to purchase from 
a particular saleyard.  
 
 
 
Page 18

Broadband, digital technology, the removal of on-line selling charges and the ability 
to set up internet systems with minimal overheads have helped on-line selling systems 
to become a real alternative for selling livestock. On-line web-based auctions allow 
commodity transaction, reserve price setting and legal change of ownership to take 
place without the seller, buyer or product having to come together physically at the 
time of the sale.  
Page 19