Grouper iridoviral disease 
Also known as sleepy grouper disease, grouper iridovirus of Taiwan (TGIV) and 
Singapore grouper iridovirus (SGIV) 
From Aquatic animal diseases significant to Australia: identification field guide, 5th edition 
Figure 1 Gross signs of secondary infection in estuary cod (Epinephelus tauvina) infected by 
grouper iridovirus 
 
Note: Deep ulceration in muscular tissue of the head. 
Source: S Kanchanakhan 
Figure 2 Gross signs of secondary infection in estuary cod (Epinephelus tauvina) infected by 
grouper iridovirus 
 
Note: Haemorrhagic red boils (a) on the body surface. 
Source: S Kanchanakhan

Grouper iridoviral disease 
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
2 
Signs of disease 
Important: Animals with this disease may show one or more of these signs, but the pathogen may 
still be present in the absence of any signs. 
Disease signs at the farm, tank or pond level are: 
• 
typically high mortalities, with many dead and moribund fish 
• 
high mortality of young grouper 
• 
loss of appetite 
• 
lethargic swimming 
• 
rapid opercular movements and dashing to the surface for air (in the terminal phase). 
Gross pathological signs are: 
• 
darkened body colour, pale gills and enlarged spleen 
• 
signs of secondary infection such as deep ulceration or papular lesions. 
Microscopic pathological signs are: 
• 
necrosis of the splenic pulp, and myocardium 
• 
necrosis and reduction of haematopoietic tissue of the kidney in the absence of marked cell 
hypertrophy. 
Disease agent 
Grouper iridovirus disease is caused by infection with grouper iridovirus (GIV), belonging to the genus 
Ranavirus within the family Iridoviridae. Synonyms include grouper iridovirus of Taiwan (TGIV) and 
Singapore grouper iridovirus (SGIV). 
Host range 
Table 1 Species known to be naturally susceptible to GIV 
Common name 
Scientific name 
Brown marbled grouper 
Epinephelus fuscoguttatus 
Coral trout 
Plectropomus leopardus 
Estuary cod 
Epinephelus tauvina 
Giant grouper 
Epinephelus lanceolatus 
Grouper and estuary cod 
Epinephelus spp. 
Malabar grouper 
Epinephelus malabaricus 
Spotted coral grouper 
Plectropomus maculatus 
Tiger grouper hybrid 
Epinephelus fuscoguttatus × E. lanceolatus 
Yellow grouper 
Epinephelus awoara 
Note: All other species have been shown to be experimentally susceptible.

Grouper iridoviral disease 
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
3 
Presence in Australia 
Exotic disease—not recorded in Australia. 
Map 1 Presence of grouper iridoviral disease, by jurisdiction 
 
Epidemiology 
• 
Grouper iridoviral disease causes losses in fry and juvenile grouper, and in 1 to 2-year-old 
market-sized grouper (a highly priced product in tropical mariculture). 
• 
Clinical disease and highest mortalities are usually seen in 3 to 4-month-old fish after stocking 
into sea cages. 
• 
Older diseased fish typically appear lethargic due to anaemia. 
• 
Horizontal contact and waterborne transmission appear to be the principal mechanisms for virus 
spread. 
Differential diagnosis 
The list of similar diseases in the next section refers only to the diseases covered by this field guide. 
Gross pathological signs may also be representative of diseases not included in this guide. Do not rely 
on gross signs to provide a definitive diagnosis. Use them as a tool to help identify the listed diseases 
that most closely account for the observed signs. 
Similar diseases 
Infection with Aphanomyces invadans (EUS), infection with infectious spleen and kidney necrosis 
virus (ISKNV)-like viruses, red sea bream iridoviral disease (RSIVD) and viral encephalopathy and 
retinopathy (VER).

Grouper iridoviral disease 
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
4 
Sample collection 
Only trained personnel should collect samples. Using only gross pathological signs to differentiate 
between diseases is not reliable, and some aquatic animal disease agents pose a risk to humans. If 
you are not appropriately trained, phone your state or territory hotline number and report your 
observations. If you have to collect samples, the agency taking your call will advise you on the 
appropriate course of action. Local or district fisheries or veterinary authorities may also advise on 
sampling. 
Emergency disease hotline 
See something you think is this disease? Report it. Even if you’re not sure. 
Call the Emergency Animal Disease Watch Hotline on 1800 675 888. They will refer you to the right 
state or territory agency. 
Further reading 
Hazeri M, Hassan MD, Abba Y, Omar AR, Allaudin ZN, Soltani M, Hamdan RH, Mohamad NF 2017, 
Molecular characterisation of grouper iridovirus isolates from Peninsular Malaysia, Journal Veterinar 
Malaysia 
Ma H, Peng C, Su Y, Feng J, Guo Z 2016, ‘Isolation of a Ranavirus-type grouper iridovirus in mainland 
China and comparison of its pathogenicity with that of a Megalocytivirus-type grouper iridovirus’, 
Aquaculture 
Network of Aquaculture Centres in Asia–Pacific Grouper iridoviral disease: disease card 
These hyperlinks were correct at the time of publication. 
Contact details 
Emergency Animal Disease Watch Hotline 1800 675 888 
Email AAH@agriculture.gov.au 
Website agriculture.gov.au/pests-diseases-weeds/aquatic 
© Commonwealth of Australia 2020 
This work is copyright. It may be reproduced in whole or in part subject to the inclusion of an acknowledgement of 
the source and no commercial usage or sale.