Infection with Batrachochytrium salamandrivorans 
(Bsal) 
Also known as Bsal chytridiomycosis and salamander chytrid disease 
From Aquatic animal diseases significant to Australia: identification field guide, 5th edition 
Figure 1 Adult fire salamander (Salamandra salamandra) infected by Batrachochytrium 
salamandrivorans 
 
Note: Lesions consist of multifocal erosions with a black margin and dysecdysis. 
Source: F Pasmans 
Signs of disease 
Important: Animals with this disease may show one or more of these signs, but the pathogen may 
still be present in the absence of any signs. 
Disease signs at the farm, tank or pond level are: 
• 
anorexia 
• 
apathy 
• 
ataxia 
• 
high levels of mortality at temperatures below 25°C. 
Gross pathological signs are: 
• 
discolouration and/or roughening of the skin, with excessive skin sloughing 
• 
focal or multifocal skin ulcerations with significant degradation of the epidermis, impairment of 
vital skin functions, and subsequent death.

Infection with Batrachochytrium salamandrivorans 
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
2 
Microscopic pathological signs are: 
• 
lesions consisting of focal necrotic epidermal ulcerations with high numbers of colonial thalli of 
B. salamandrivorans, bordered by keratinocytes containing intracellular fungal thalli. 
Disease agent 
Bsal chytridiomycosis is caused by infection with the parasitic chytrid fungus, Batrachochytrium 
salamandrivorans (Bsal) of the class Chytridiomycota, order Rhizophydiales. B. salamandrivorans was 
first detected in wild salamanders in the Netherlands and Belgium in 2013/14, and was subsequently 
found in captive salamanders and newts in Germany, and the UK. Investigations suggest 
B. salamandrivorans probably originated in southeast Asia, where it has been found in Japan, 
Thailand, Vietnam and China. 
Host range 
A range of salamanders, newts and sirens (order Caudata) appear to be highly susceptible to 
infection with B. salamandrivorans. Members of the families Salamandridae, Plethodontidae, 
Hynobiidae and Sirenidae can carry the pathogen, often without showing any clinical signs. Species 
endemic to Asia appear to be more resistant to disease but may be asymptomatic carriers of the 
fungus. 
Table 1 Species known to be susceptible to Batrachochytrium salamandrivorans 
Common name 
Scientific name 
Alpine newt 
Ichthyosaura alpestris 
Blue tailed fire belly newt 
Cynops cyanurus 
Chiang Mai crocodile newt 
Tylototriton uyenoi 
Clouded salamander 
Hynobius nebulosus 
Eastern newt 
Notophthalmus viridescens 
European cave salamanders 
Speleomantes spp. 
Fire salamander 
Salamandra salamandra 
French cave salamander 
Hydromantes strinatii 
Italian newt 
Lissotriton italicus 
Japanese clawed salamander 
Onychodactylus japonicas 
Japanese fire belly newt 
Cynops pyrrhogaster 
Lesser siren 
Siren intermedia 
North African fire salamander 
Salamandra algira 
Northern crested newt 
Triturus cristatus 
Northern spectacled salamander 
Salamandrina perspicillata 
Rough skinned newt 
Taricha granulosa 
Sardinian brook salamander 
Euproctus platycephalus 
Siberian salamander 
Salamandrella keyserlingii 
Smooth newt 
Lissotriton vulgaris 
Spanish ribbed newt 
Pleurodeles waltl 
Sword tailed newt 
Cynops ensicauda

Infection with Batrachochytrium salamandrivorans 
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
3 
Common name 
Scientific name 
Vietnamese crocodile newt 
Tylototriton vietnamensis 
Vietnamese salamander 
Paramesotriton deloustali 
Wenxian knobby newt 
Tylototriton wenxianensis 
Yellow spotted newt 
Neurergus crocatus 
Zeigler’s crocodile newt 
Tylototriton ziegleri 
Presence in Australia 
Exotic disease—not recorded in Australia. 
Map 1 Presence of Batrachochytrium salamandrivorans, by jurisdiction 
 
Epidemiology 
• 
Batrachochytrium salamandrivorans infects epidermal tissue causing multifocal ulcerations. 
• 
Optimal temperature for growth of the fungus is 15°C and optimal salinity is 0ppt (freshwater). 
Desiccation is fatal for all life stages of the fungus. 
• 
Horizontal transmission is via waterborne, motile zoospores and is likely to be by direct animal-
to-animal contact. Mortality occurs 12 to 18 days after exposure to infective zoospores at 15°C, 
and within 22 to 27 days when susceptible animals are placed in contact with infected animals. 
• 
Zoospores can remain viable in water for up to 3 weeks. 
• 
Batrachochytrium salamandrivorans has been eliminated from wild salamanders by exposure to 
greater than 25°C for at least 10 days or a synergistic treatment with antifungals. 
• 
Disease outbreaks in wild populations may be seasonal (during the cooler months), and can 
cause significant population declines that may lead to extinction.

Infection with Batrachochytrium salamandrivorans 
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
4 
Differential diagnosis 
The list of similar diseases in the next section refers only to the diseases covered by this field guide. 
Gross pathological signs may also be representative of diseases not included in this guide. Do not rely 
on gross signs to provide a definitive diagnosis. Use them as a tool to help identify the listed diseases 
that most closely account for the observed signs. 
Similar diseases 
Infection with Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis. 
Sample collection 
Only trained personnel should collect samples. Using only gross pathological signs to differentiate 
between diseases is not reliable, and some aquatic animal disease agents pose a risk to humans. If 
you are not appropriately trained, phone your state or territory hotline number and report your 
observations. If you have to collect samples, the agency taking your call will advise you on the 
appropriate course of action. Local or district fisheries or veterinary authorities may also advise on 
sampling. 
Emergency disease hotline 
See something you think is this disease? Report it. Even if you’re not sure. 
Call the Emergency Animal Disease Watch Hotline on 1800 675 888. They will refer you to the right 
state or territory agency. 
Microscope images 
Figure 2 Hematoxylin and eosin stained section of skin of fire salamander (Salamandra 
salamandra) infected by Batrachochytrium salamandrivorans 
 
Note: Histopathological lesions consist of multifocal epidermal erosions, with numerous colonial chytrid thalli inside 
epidermal cells and bacterial overgrowth. Scale bar = 200µm 
Source: A Martel

Infection with Batrachochytrium salamandrivorans 
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
5 
Further reading 
European Food Safety Authority Scientific and technical assistance concerning the survival, 
establishment and spread of ‘Batrachochytrium salamandrivorans’ (Bsal) in the EU 
World Organisation for Animal Health, ‘Batrachochytrium salamandrivorans’ disease card 
These hyperlinks were correct at the time of publication. 
Contact details 
Emergency Animal Disease Watch Hotline 1800 675 888 
Email AAH@agriculture.gov.au 
Website agriculture.gov.au/pests-diseases-weeds/aquatic 
© Commonwealth of Australia 2020 
This work is copyright. It may be reproduced in whole or in part subject to the inclusion of an acknowledgement of 
the source and no commercial usage or sale.