Infection with ranavirus 
Also known as frog virus 3 (FV-3), Bohle iridovirus (BIV), Ambystoma tigrinum virus 
(ATV), and Mahaffey Road virus (MHRV) 
From Aquatic animal diseases significant to Australia: identification field guide, 5th edition 
Figure 1 Hindlimb of magnificent tree frog (Litoria splendida) infected with Mahaffey Road virus 
 
Note: Haemorrhagic skin papules and subcutaneous oedema of the ventral surface (A).  Skin papules and erosions on the 
dorsal surface (B). 
Source: Ian Jerrett 
Figure 2 Ornate burrowing frog (Platyplectrum ornatus) metamorphs infected with Bohle iridovirus 
 
Note: Varying levels of ascites. 
Source: R Speare

Infection with ranavirus 
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
2 
Figure 3 Green tree frog (Litoria caerulea) infected with Mahaffey Road virus 
 
Note: Haemorrhagic perineural tissue and spinal nerves together with petechiation of the parietal coelomic serosa. A skin 
ulcer (a) is evident on the ventral neck. 
Signs of disease 
Important: Animals with this disease may show one or more of these signs, but the pathogen may 
still be present in the absence of any signs. 
Disease signs at the farm, tank or pond level are: 
• 
erratic swimming 
• 
lethargy 
• 
loss of equilibrium 
• 
buoyancy problems 
• 
morbidity 
• 
rapid severe mortality events.

Infection with ranavirus 
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
3 
Gross pathological signs are: 
• 
poor body condition 
• 
lordosis (abnormal forward curvature of the spine). 
In tadpoles and metamorphs, additional gross pathological signs are: 
• 
ascites (free fluid in the abdominal cavity) 
• 
generalised oedema (fluid swelling) of tissues 
• 
focal haemorrhages. 
In adults, additional gross pathological signs are: 
• 
skin ulcers, papules and/or erosions 
• 
focal and systematic haemorrhages 
• 
enlargement of the spleen or liver 
• 
oedema of subcutaneous tissue (particularly around the jaw and head, with the tongue 
protruding). 
Microscopic pathological signs are: 
• 
severe renal, pulmonary, hepatic, splenic and haematopoietic necroses and haemorrhages 
• 
basophilic intracytoplasmic inclusion bodies 
• 
erosion, ulceration and hyperplasia of epithelial epidermal cells. 
Disease agent 
This disease is caused by infection with members of the genus Ranavirus (family Iridoviridae). Viruses 
infecting amphibians include frog virus 3 (FV-3), Bohle iridovirus (BIV), Ambystoma tigrinum virus 
(ATV), and Mahaffey Road virus (MHRV). There are many other tentative species in this genus. Bohle 
iridovirus and Mahaffey Road virus are known from northern Australia in native frogs and cane toads. 
Host range 
Amphibians (all members of the class Amphibia) are considered to be susceptible to infection with 
ranavirus. Natural infections are known from most of the major families of the orders Anura (frogs 
and toads) and Caudata (salamanders, newts and sirens). 
Infection with ranaviruses in fish and reptiles can result in asymptomatic infections through to 
epizootics, depending on species, stress and environmental factors. In challenge experiments, 
species acutely susceptible to Bohle iridovirus were juvenile green tree frogs (Litoria caerulea), 
striped burrowing frogs (Cyclorana alboguttata), short-footed frogs (C. brevipes) and red-backed 
toadlets (Pseudophryne coriacea). Species less susceptible in trials were adult red tree frogs (Litoria 
rubella), bumpy rocketfrog (L. inermis), green tree frogs, ornate nursery frogs (Cophixalus ornatus), 
sharp- snouted day frogs (Taudactylus acutirostris) and cane toads (Bufo marinus).

Infection with ranavirus 
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
4 
Table 1 Species known to be susceptible to ranavirus 
Common name 
Scientific name 
Frogs and toads 
Order Anura 
Bumpy rocket froga 
Litoria inermis 
Cane toada 
Rhinella marina 
Great barred frog 
Mixophyes fasciolatus 
Green tree froga 
Litoria caerulea 
Magnificent tree froga 
Litoria splendida 
Ornate burrowing froga 
Platyplectrum ornatus 
Ornate nursery froga 
Cophixalus ornatus 
Red tree frog 
Litoria rubella 
Red-backed toadleta 
Pseudophryne coriacea 
Sharp-snouted day froga 
Taudactylus acutirostris 
Short-footed frog 
Cyclorana brevipes 
Striped burrowing froga 
Cyclorana alboguttata 
Salamanders newts and sirens 
Order Caudata 
Alpine newt 
Ichthyosaura alpestris 
Blue tailed fire belly newt 
Cynops cyanurus 
Chiang Mai crocodile newt 
Tylototriton uyenoi 
Chinese firebelly newt 
Cynops orientalis 
Clouded salamander 
Hynobius nebulosus 
Eastern newt 
Notophthalmus viridescens 
European cave salamander 
Speleomantes spp. 
Fire salamander 
Salamandra salamandra 
French cave salamander 
Hydromantes strinatii 
Italian newt 
Lissotriton italicus 
Japanese clawed salamander 
Onychodactylus japonicas 
Japanese fire belly newt 
Cynops pyrrhogaster 
Lesser siren 
Siren intermedia 
North African fire salamander 
Salamandra algira 
Northern crested newt 
Triturus cristatus 
Northern spectacled salamander 
Salamandrina perspicillata 
Rough skinned newt 
Taricha granulosa 
Sardinian brook salamander 
Euproctus platycephalus 
Siberian salamander 
Salamandrella keyserlingii 
Smooth newt 
Lissotriton vulgaris 
Spanish ribbed newt 
Pleurodeles waltl 
Sword tailed newt 
Cynops ensicauda 
Vietnamese crocodile newt 
Tylototriton vietnamensis

Infection with ranavirus 
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
5 
Common name 
Scientific name 
Vietnamese salamander 
Paramesotriton deloustali 
Wenxian knobby newt 
Tylototriton wenxianensis 
Yellow spotted newt 
Neurergus crocatus 
Zeigler’s crocodile newt 
Tylototriton ziegleri 
a Naturally susceptible. Note: other species likely to be susceptible or shown to be experimentally susceptible. 
Presence in Australia 
Infection with ranavirus has been officially reported in Australia. Bohle iridovirus was originally 
isolated from tadpoles of ornate burrowing frogs (Platyplectrum ornatus) in far north Queensland. It 
has since been isolated from moribund green tree frogs and captive juvenile red-backed toadlets. 
Another ranavirus, Mahaffey Road virus, was reported from moribund tree frogs in Darwin, Northern 
Territory. There is serological evidence of ranavirus infection in cane toads across northern Australia. 
Map 1 Presence of ranavirus, by jurisdiction 
 
Epidemiology 
• 
Two syndromes in frogs are associated with ranavirus infection: ulcerative syndrome and 
haemorrhagic syndrome. 
• 
The most common presentation is a rapid, severe mortality event with death due to peracute 
systemic haemorrhagic disease. However, in Australia, morbidity is more common. 
• 
Mortality and morbidity vary from species to species (0-100%), and may be variable depending 
on virus type, and age and health status of the host. 
• 
Horizontal transmission occurs via contaminated water, animal-to-animal contact and predation 
or cannibalism. 
• 
These viruses can be spread between widely separated river systems and impoundments, which 
suggests viral persistence and the existence of transmission mechanisms other than direct 
horizontal transmission.

Infection with ranavirus 
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
6 
• 
Vertical transmission is considered likely, but has not been experimentally documented. 
• 
Possible vectors include nets, boats and other equipment, or amphibians used for bait by 
recreational fishers. Birds are potential mechanical vectors. 
• 
Temperature is considered a likely factor influencing disease outbreaks, with the prevalence or 
severity of outbreaks greater during warmer months. 
Differential diagnosis 
The list of similar diseases in the next section refers only to the diseases covered by this field guide. 
Gross pathological signs may also be representative of diseases not included in this guide. Do not rely 
on gross signs to provide a definitive diagnosis. Use them as a tool to help identify the listed diseases 
that most closely account for the observed signs. 
Similar diseases 
No diseases in this field guide are similar to infection with ranavirus. 
Sample collection 
Only trained personnel should collect samples. Using only gross pathological signs to differentiate 
between diseases is not reliable, and some aquatic animal disease agents pose a risk to humans. If 
you are not appropriately trained, phone your state or territory hotline number and report your 
observations. If you have to collect samples, the agency taking your call will advise you on the 
appropriate course of action. Local or district fisheries or veterinary authorities may also advise on 
sampling. 
Emergency disease hotline 
See something you think is this disease? Report it. Even if you’re not sure. 
Call the Emergency Animal Disease Watch Hotline on 1800 675 888. They will refer you to the right 
state or territory agency. 
Further reading 
Wildlife Health Australia Ranaviral disease in wild Australian amphibians 
World Organisation for Animal Health Manual of Diagnostic Tests for Aquatic Animals 
These hyperlinks were correct at the time of publication. 
Contact details 
Emergency Animal Disease Watch Hotline 1800 675 888 
Email AAH@agriculture.gov.au 
Website agriculture.gov.au/pests-diseases-weeds/aquatic 
© Commonwealth of Australia 2020 
This work is copyright. It may be reproduced in whole or in part subject to the inclusion of an acknowledgement of 
the source and no commercial usage or sale.