Infection with white spot syndrome virus (WSSV) 
Also known as white spot disease (WSD) 
From Aquatic animal diseases significant to Australia: identification field guide, 5th edition 
Figure 1 WSD in giant black tiger prawn (Penaeus monodon) 
 
Note: White spots on carapace are typical of infection following acute phase of infection. 
Source: B Diggles 
Figure 2 WSD in giant black tiger prawn (Penaeus monodon) 
 
Note: Carapace is loose and when removed, large smooth-edged white spots are evident. Numerous smaller white spots 
are also evident on the abdominal segments. 
Source: B Diggles

Infection with white spot syndrome virus 
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
2 
Figure 3 Five juvenile black tiger prawns (Penaeus monodon) infected with WSSV lacking classical 
white spots 
 
Note: Prawns exhibit few, if any, white spots. Prawns infected with WSSV can present as ‘normal’ prawns.  
Source: B Diggles 
Signs of disease 
Important: Animals with this disease may show one or more of these signs, but the pathogen may 
still be present in the absence of any signs. 
Disease signs at the farm, tank or pond level are: 
• 
rapid onset of mass mortality (80% or more) in farmed penaeid prawns during the grow-out 
period 
• 
lethargy 
• 
cessation of feeding 
• 
aggregations of moribund prawns near the water surface at the edge of the rearing pond 
or tank. 
Gross pathological signs are: 
• 
loose carapace 
• 
high degree of colour variation, with a predominance of darkened (red, brown or pink) body 
surface and appendages 
• 
heavy fouling of the surface and gills by external parasites 
• 
white midgut line through the abdomen of severely affected larvae and postlarvae 
• 
delayed (or completely absent) clotting reaction of the haemolymph of infected shrimp 
• 
white calcium deposits embedded in the shell, causing white spots 0.5 to 3.0mm in diameter. 
Prawns with WSD may not show distinctive clinical signs. If present, shell lesions can range from 
minute spots to discs several millimetres in diameter, and may coalesce into larger white plates. 
Spots are most easily observed by removing the cuticle over the cephalothorax, scraping away any

Infection with white spot syndrome virus 
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
3 
attached tissue with the thumbnail and holding the cuticle up to the light. However, white spots in 
the cuticle are unreliable for even preliminary diagnosis of WSD. Similar spots can be produced by 
some bacteria, high alkalinity and other infectious agents or environmental conditions. 
Microscopic pathological signs are: 
• 
hypertrophied nuclei in gills and/or cuticular epithelium 
• 
viral aggregates (shown as small reflective spots) in unstained smear preparations of the 
haemolymph by dark-field microscopy 
• 
pathognomonic inclusion bodies in histological sections in target tissues. 
Disease agent 
WSD is caused by infection with white spot syndrome virus (WSSV), a large DNA virus assigned as the 
only member of the genus Whispovirus (family Nimaviridae). The virus only infects crustaceans and 
appears not to be related to any other known viruses. It is not related to white spot disease of finfish, 
which is caused by parasitic ciliate protozoans. WSSV is known to occur in fresh, brackish and marine 
water. 
Host range 
All decapod crustaceans (order Decapoda) are considered susceptible to infection, including prawns, 
lobsters and crabs from marine, brackish or freshwater environments (Table 1). The disease has 
mainly been a problem in farmed penaeid (family Penaeidae) prawns. 
Carriers of the virus (Table 2) include rotifers, marine molluscs, polychaete worms and non-decapod 
crustaceans such as Artemia salina, copepods, non-crustacean arthropods and aquatic insect larvae. 
Birds can also spread the virus. 
Table 1 Species known to be susceptible to infection with WSSV 
Common name 
Scientific name 
All decapod crustaceans 
Decapoda—all species 
Aloha prawn 
Penaeus marginatus 
American lobster 
Homarus americanus 
Argentine stiletto shrimp 
Artemesia longinaris 
Asian freshwater shrimpa 
Macrobrachium dayanum 
Barred estuarine shrimpa 
Palaemon serrifer 
Black tiger prawna 
Penaeus monodon 
Brown tiger prawna 
Penaeus esculentus 
Brush clawed shore crab 
Hemigrapsus penicillatus 
Chinese mitten craba 
Eriocheir sinensis 
Chinese white shrimpa 
Penaeus (Fenneropenaeus) chinensis 
Crayfish (native to Europe)a 
Astacus spp. 
Crayfish (native to North America)a 
Orconectes spp. 
Cuata swimcrab 
Callinectes arcuatus 
Daggerblade grass shrimp 
Palaemon pugio

Infection with white spot syndrome virus 
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
4 
Common name 
Scientific name 
European river crab 
Potamon potamios 
European shore crab 
Carcinus maenas 
Fiddler crab 
Uca vocans 
Freshwater crayfisha 
Cherax spp. 
Freshwater prawn  
Macrobrachium lanchesteri 
Giant crayfish (native to Australia) 
Astacopsis spp. 
Giant freshwater prawna 
Macrobrachium rosenbergii 
Giant Tasmanian crayfish 
Astacopsis gouldi 
Gippsland spiny crayfish 
Euastacus kershawi 
Green tiger prawn or grooved tiger prawna 
Penaeus semisulcatus 
Greentail prawna 
Metapenaeus bennettae 
Gulf banana prawna 
Penaeus (Fenneropenaeus) merguiensis 
Indian banana prawna 
Penaeus (Fenneropenaeus) indicus 
Japanese crayfish 
Cambaroides japonicus 
Jelly prawnsa 
Acetes spp. 
Kuruma prawna 
Penaeus (Marsupenaeus) japonicus 
Louisiana swamp crayfisha 
Procambarus clarkii 
Mangrove swimming craba 
Thalamita crenata 
Marbled crayfish 
Procambarus fallax. f. virginalis 
Mississippi grass shrimp 
Palaemonetes kadiakensis 
Mud craba 
Scylla serrata 
Mysid shrimp 
Palaemon styliferus 
Noble crayfish 
Astacus astacus 
Northern brown shrimpa 
Penaeus (Farfantepenaeus) aztecus 
Northern pink shrimpa 
Penaeus (Farfantepenaeus) duorarum 
Northern white shrimpa 
Penaeus (Litopenaeus) setiferus 
Oriental freshwater shrimpa 
Macrobrachium nipponense 
Oriental prawn 
Exopalaemon carinicauda 
Pacific blue shrimpa 
Penaeus (Litopenaeus) stylirostris 
Pacific white shrimpa 
Penaeus (Litopenaeus) vannamei 
Red claw crayfisha 
Cherax quadricarinatus 
Red crab 
Sesarma mederi 
Red endeavour (greasyback) prawna 
Metapenaeus ensis 
Sand craba 
Portunus pelagicus 
Signal crayfish 
Pacifastacus leniusculus 
Smooth crayfish 
Geocherax spp. 
Southern brown shrimp 
Penaeus (Farfantepenaeus) subtilis 
Southern white shrimp 
Penaeus (Litopenaeus) schmitti

Infection with white spot syndrome virus 
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
5 
Common name 
Scientific name 
Spiny crayfish 
Euastacus spp. 
Stone crayfish 
Austropotamobius torrentium 
Sunda river prawn 
Macrobrachium sintangene 
Superb freshwater shrimp 
Macrobrachium superbum 
Three spot swimming craba 
Portunus sanguinolentus 
Tropical spiny lobster 
Panulirus spp. 
Turkish crayfish 
Astacus leptodactylus 
Western white shrimp 
Penaeus (Litopenaeus) occidentalis 
White-clawed crayfish 
Austropotamobius pallipes 
Yellow-leg shrimp 
Penaeus (Farfantepenaeus) californiensis 
Yabbies (freshwater) 
Cherax destructor 
a Naturally susceptible. Note: Other species are likely to be susceptible or shown to be experimentally susceptible. 
Table 2 Non-decapod crustacean carriers 
Common name 
Scientific name 
Annelids 
Various genera and species 
Aquatic insects 
Various genera and species 
Brine shrimp 
Artemia salina 
Molluscs 
Various genera and species 
Parasitic copepods 
Ergasilus manicatus 
Piscivorous birds 
Various genera and species 
Planktonic copepods 
Paracartia grani 
Polychaetes 
Various genera and species 
Rotifers 
Various genera and species

Infection with white spot syndrome virus 
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
6 
Presence in Australia 
Exotic disease—under official control. 
WSD was confirmed in South East Queensland in December 2016. An emergency response to contain 
and eradicate the disease is ongoing. 
Map 1 Presence of WSSV, by jurisdiction 
 
Epidemiology 
• 
WSD is mainly a disease of farmed penaeid prawns, but many species of crustaceans are 
susceptible to infection with WSSV. 
• 
Rapid mortalities of up to 80% or more within 3 to 10 days have been reported in many 
countries. 
• 
Prawn farm productivity falls to about 40% of normal rate for 2 years, and then recovers to 
about 70% over the long term. 
• 
Some of the species listed in the host range section (such as Penaeus monodon) are extremely 
susceptible to WSSV. Others may be infected but are more resistant to disease. 
• 
Infection may be low level and chronic (lifelong carriers are possible) in healthy crustaceans, or 
acute infection with disease and mortalities. 
• 
Viral multiplication and disease appears to be induced by environmental and handling stress. 
Stressors include eye-stalk ablation, spawning, moulting, high stocking densities, changes in 
salinity, temperature and pH, and plankton blooms. Imposing such stressors on suspect 
populations can be a useful diagnostic method for detecting the virus. 
• 
All life stages are susceptible, from eggs to broodstock. 
• 
Vertical transmission occurs from infected broodstock. 
• 
Horizontal transmission of disease is usually via cannibalism of sick or dying prawns, or directly 
through contaminated water.

Infection with white spot syndrome virus 
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
7 
• 
Vectors of the virus include rotifers, marine molluscs, polychaete worms and non-decapod 
crustaceans including Artemia salina, copepods, non-crustacean arthropods and insect larvae. 
• 
Birds can transmit the disease from pond to pond by releasing caught prawns over neighbouring 
ponds. 
• 
White spot syndrome virus can persist and retain infectivity in seawater at 30°C for at least 
30 days (under laboratory conditions) and for at least 4 days in ponds. 
Differential diagnosis 
The list of similar diseases in the next section refers only to the diseases covered by this field guide. 
Gross pathological signs may also be representative of diseases not included in this guide. Do not rely 
on gross signs to provide a definitive diagnosis. Use them as a tool to help identify the listed diseases 
that most closely account for the observed signs. 
Similar diseases 
Acute hepatopancreatic necrosis disease (AHPND), infection with Hepatobacter penaei (NHP), 
infection with infectious hypodermal and haematopoietic necrosis virus (IHHNV), infection with 
shrimp haemocyte iridescent virus (SHIV), infection with Taura syndrome virus (TSV) and infection 
with yellowhead virus genotype 1 (YHV1). 
Sample collection 
Only trained personnel should collect samples. Using only gross pathological signs to differentiate 
between diseases is not reliable, and some aquatic animal disease agents pose a risk to humans. If 
you are not appropriately trained, phone your state or territory hotline number and report your 
observations. If you have to collect samples, the agency taking your call will advise you on the 
appropriate course of action. Local or district fisheries or veterinary authorities may also advise on 
sampling. 
Emergency disease hotline 
See something you think is this disease? Report it. Even if you’re not sure. 
Call the Emergency Animal Disease Watch Hotline on 1800 675 888. They will refer you to the right 
state or territory agency.

Infection with white spot syndrome virus 
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
8 
Microscope images 
Figure 4 Photomicrograph of histological section from stomach of juvenile black tiger prawn 
(Penaeus monodon) with WSD 
 
Note: Prominent intranuclear inclusion bodies are abundant in cuticular epithelium and subcuticular connective tissue of 
the organ (a). Cells in different phases of infection display intranuclear inclusion bodies. Early-phase inclusion bodies in this 
section are centronuclear and eosinophilic. These are separated from nuclear membrane and marginated chromatin by an 
artefactual halo. 900x magnification. 
Source: DV Lightner 
Figure 5 Histological section of stomach of juvenile Chinese white shrimp 
(Penaeus (Fenneropenaeus) chinensis) with advanced WSD 
 
Note: Fully developed WSSV intranuclear inclusion bodies (a) are more basophilic, appear granular in texture and nearly fill 
affected hypertrophied nucleus. 1300x magnification. 
Source: DV Lightner

Infection with white spot syndrome virus 
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
9 
Figure 6 Histological section of gills from juvenile Chinese white shrimp 
(Penaeus (Fenneropenaeus) chinensis) with WSD 
 
Note: Nearly one-quarter of cells are infected, as indicated by developing and fully developed intranuclear inclusion 
bodies (a). 900x magnification. 
Source: DV Lightner 
Figure 7 Histological section of stomach of Pacific blue shrimp (Penaeus (Litopenaeus) stylirostris) 
experimentally infected with WSSV 
 
Note: Severe grade 4 infection evidenced by classic WSD intranuclear inclusion bodies (a). 900x magnification. 
Source: DV Lightner

Infection with white spot syndrome virus 
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
10 
Figure 8 Histological section of stomach of Pacific white shrimp (Penaeus (Litopenaeus) vannamei) 
experimentally infected with WSSV 
 
Note: Severe grade 4 infection with many classic WSD intranuclear inclusion bodies. 900x magnification. 
Source: DV Lightner 
Figure 9 In situ hybridisation of histological section of stomach of juvenile Pacific white shrimp 
(Penaeus (Litopenaeus) stylirostris) with WSD 
 
Note: Intranuclear inclusion bodies in the cuticular epithelium of stomach reacting to digoxygenin-labelled DNA probe. 
900x magnification. 
Source: DV Lightner

Infection with white spot syndrome virus 
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
11 
Further reading 
CABI Invasive Species Compendium White spot disease 
CEFAS International Database on Aquatic Animal Diseases White spot disease 
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment AQUAVETPLAN disease strategy manual: 
White spot disease of prawns 
World Organisation for Animal Health Manual of Diagnostic tests for aquatic animals 
These hyperlinks were correct at the time of publication. 
Contact details 
Emergency Animal Disease Watch Hotline 1800 675 888 
Email AAH@agriculture.gov.au 
Website agriculture.gov.au/pests-diseases-weeds/aquatic 
© Commonwealth of Australia 2020 
This work is copyright. It may be reproduced in whole or in part subject to the inclusion of an acknowledgement of 
the source and no commercial usage or sale.