Infection with Perkinsus olseni 
Also known as perkinsosis and Perkinsus disease 
From Aquatic animal diseases significant to Australia: identification field guide, 5th edition 
Figure 1 Cross-section of foot of greenlip abalone (Haliotis laevigata) infected with Perkinsus olseni 
 
Note: Yellow and smaller brown pustular lesions within the body tissue infected with P. olseni. 
Source: N Moody, CSIRO Australian Animal Health Laboratory 
Signs of disease 
Important: Animals with this disease may show one or more of these signs, but the pathogen may 
still be present in the absence of any signs. 
Disease signs at the farm, tank or pond level are: 
• 
morbidity observed in cultured greenlip (Haliotis laevigata) and blacklip (H. rubra) abalone 
• 
gaping in bivalve species 
• 
increased mortality. 
Gross pathological signs are: 
• 
spherical brown abscesses up to 8mm in diameter containing a caseous creamy-brown or yellow 
deposit in the foot and mantle of blacklip and greenlip abalone (affecting marketability) 
• 
thin, watery tissue with a pale digestive gland 
• 
nodules in the mantle or gills. 
Microscopic pathological signs are: 
• 
large focal or multifocal necrotic lesions in connective tissue. These contain haemocyte 
aggregations around individuals or groups of crescent- or signet-ring-shaped Perkinsus cells with 
eccentric vacuoles.

Infection with Perkinsus olseni 
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
2 
Disease agent 
Perkinsosis is caused by infection with Perkinsus spp., alveolate protists in the family Perkinsidae. 
P. olseni has been placed nominally in the order Dinoflagellida, but its higher taxonomy is subject to 
scientific debate. Several species of the genus Perkinsus infect molluscs such as oysters, mussels, 
clams and abalone worldwide. 
Perkinsus olseni is the main species known to cause this disease in the Asia–Pacific region and is 
responsible for perkinsosis in abalone, clams and pearl oysters in Australia. P. atlanticus is a junior 
synonym of P. olseni. Another species, P. chesapeaki, has been detected in wild mud arks (Anadara 
trapezia) in Moreton Bay, Queensland. 
Host range 
P. olseni appears to have low host specificity and can infect a wide range of bivalve and gastropod 
molluscs. 
Table 1 Species known to be susceptible to infection with Perkinsus olseni 
Common name 
Scientific name 
Akoya pearl oystera 
Pinctada martensii 
Asian littleneck clama 
Venerupis philippinarum 
Blacklip abalonea 
Haliotis rubra 
Blacklip pearl oystera 
Pinctada margaritifera 
Crocus clama 
Tridacna crocea 
Elongated giant clam or rugose giant clama 
Tridacna maxima 
European aurora venus clama 
Venerupis aurea 
Giant clama 
Tridacna gigas 
Greenlip abalonea 
Haliotis laevigata 
Green-lipped mussela 
Perna canaliculus 
Grooved carpet shell or venerid clama 
Ruditapes decussatus 
Japanese pearl oystera 
Pinctada fucata 
Kumamoto oyster 
Crassostrea sikamea 
Manila clama 
Ruditapes (Venerupis) philippinarum 
New Zealand ark shella 
Barbatia novaezelandiae 
New Zealand cocklea 
Austrovenus stutchburyi 
New Zealand pauaa 
Haliotis iris 
New Zealand pipia 
Paphies australis 
New Zealand scallopa 
Pecten novaezelandiae 
Pacific oystera 
Crassostrea gigas 
Pearl oystera 
Pinctada sugillata 
Pullet carpet shella 
Venerupis corrugata 
Sand cockle 
Katelysia rhytiphora 
Silverlip pearl oystera 
Pinctada maxima 
Southern mud oyster or Australian flat oystera 
Ostrea angasi

Infection with Perkinsus olseni 
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
3 
Common name 
Scientific name 
Staircase abalonea 
Haliotis scalaris 
Suminoe oystera 
Crassostrea ariakensis 
Sydney cockle or mud arka 
Anadara trapezia 
Venerid clama 
Ruditapes semidecussatus 
Venerid commercial clama 
Pitar prostrata 
Venus clam 
Protothaca jedoensis 
Wedge shell 
Macomona liliana 
Whirling abalonea 
Haliotis cyclobates 
a Naturally susceptible. Note: Other species have been shown to be experimentally susceptible. 
Presence in Australia 
Perkinsus olseni has been reported in Queensland, New South Wales, South Australia and Western 
Australia; and in Australian flat oysters from Victoria. P. olseni was originally described from wild 
abalone in South Australia, but has since been detected in a wide variety of molluscs, including clams 
and pearl oysters. 
Map 1 Presence of Perkinsus olseni, by jurisdiction

Infection with Perkinsus olseni 
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
4 
Epidemiology 
• 
Perkinsus olseni has been associated with mass mortality of Haliotis spp. (blacklip and greenlip 
abalone) in the Gulf of St Vincent, South Australia, and coastal New South Wales (mostly blacklip 
abalone). 
• 
Horizontal transmission occurs directly from host to host. Some environmental conditions 
(temperature and salinity) can promote a lifelong carrier state. Higher water temperatures 
(greater than 20°C) can cause disease and mortalities in temperate species such as abalone. 
• 
Infection intensity increases with the age of the host. 
• 
Prezoosporangia that escape from necrotic pustules or decaying dead abalone undergo further 
development to zoosporangia in seawater. 
• 
Within 9 days at 20°C and 3 days at 28°C, hundreds of motile, biflagellated zoospores (about 
3µm by 5µm) exit from the zoosporangium. The zoospores are infective to abalone and other 
molluscs. 
• 
P. olseni can survive in salt water for several weeks at –20°C. However, the parasite cannot 
survive below 15ppt salinity. 
Differential diagnosis 
The list of similar diseases in the next section refers only to the diseases covered by this field guide. 
Gross pathological signs may also be representative of diseases not included in this guide. Do not rely 
on gross signs to provide a definitive diagnosis. Use them as a tool to help identify the listed diseases 
that most closely account for the observed signs. 
Similar diseases 
Infection with Perkinsus marinus. 
The clinical signs of infection with P. olseni are similar to those of infection with other species of 
Perkinsus. These include occasional pustules in soft tissue, pale digestive gland, poor condition, 
emaciation, shrinkage of mantle and retarded growth. It is therefore difficult to make a presumptive 
diagnosis based on gross signs alone. Any presumptive diagnosis requires further laboratory 
examination. 
Sample collection 
Only trained personnel should collect samples. Using only gross pathological signs to differentiate 
between diseases is not reliable, and some aquatic animal disease agents pose a risk to humans. If 
you are not appropriately trained, phone your state or territory hotline number and report your 
observations. If you have to collect samples, the agency taking your call will advise you on the 
appropriate course of action. Local or district fisheries or veterinary authorities may also advise on 
sampling. 
Emergency disease hotline 
See something you think is this disease? Report it. Even if you’re not sure. 
Call the Emergency Animal Disease Watch Hotline on 1800 675 888. They will refer you to the right 
state or territory agency.

Infection with Perkinsus olseni 
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
5 
Microscope images 
Figure 2 Tissue of New Zealand cockle (Austrovenus stutchburyi) infected with Perkinsus olseni 
 
Note: Greatly enlarged individual trophozoites (also called hypnospores) of P. olseni. Sample was stained black by Lugol’s 
iodine after infected tissue was incubated in Ray’s fluid thioglycollate medium. Stained tissue is visible with the naked eye. 
Source: B Diggles 
Figure 3 Histopathology of New Zealand cockle (Austrovenus stutchburyi) infected with 
Perkinsus olseni 
 
Note: Clusters of developing P. olseni trophozoites surrounded by a strongly eosinophilic periodic acid-Shiff positive 
amorphous matrix and a host response. Scale bar = 128µm. 
Source: B Diggles

Infection with Perkinsus olseni 
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
6 
Figure 4 Histopathology of clam (Ruditapes sp.) infected with Perkinsus olseni 
 
Note: A cluster of signet-ring-shaped P. olseni trophozoites surrounded by an encapsulating host response. 
Source: E Burreson 
Figure 5 Pedal tissue of greenlip abalone (Haliotis laevigata) infected with Perkinsus olseni 
 
Note: The lesion contains multilocular P. olseni clusters among haemocytes and floccular debris. Haematoxylin and eosin 
stain. 100x magnification. 
Source: S Bastianello

Infection with Perkinsus olseni 
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
7 
Figure 6 Pedal tissue of greenlip abalone (Haliotis laevigata) infected with Perkinsus olseni 
 
Note: Higher magnification view of Figure 5. Multilocular P. olseni clusters, and more mature signet-ring-shaped organisms 
among haemocytes and floccular debris. Haematoxylin and eosin stain. 200x magnification. 
Source: S Bastianello 
Further reading 
CABI Invasive Species Compendium Infection with ‘Perkinsus olseni’ 
CEFAS International Database on Aquatic Animal Diseases Infection with ‘Perkinsus olseni’ 
World Organisation for Animal Health Manual of diagnostic tests for aquatic animals 
These hyperlinks were correct at the time of publication. 
Contact details 
Emergency Animal Disease Watch Hotline 1800 675 888 
Email AAH@agriculture.gov.au 
Website agriculture.gov.au/pests-diseases-weeds/aquatic 
© Commonwealth of Australia 2020 
This work is copyright. It may be reproduced in whole or in part subject to the inclusion of an acknowledgement of 
the source and no commercial usage or sale.