Infection with Macrobrachium rosenbergii nodavirus 
(MrNV) 
Also known as white tail disease and white muscle disease 
From Aquatic animal diseases significant to Australia: identification field guide, 
5th Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
Figure 1 White tail disease in giant freshwater prawn (Macrobrachium rosenbergii) postlarvae 
infected with MrNV 
 
Note: Compare opaque musculature of affected prawns with the more transparent healthy prawns. 
Source: AS Sahul Hameed 
Signs of disease 
Important: Animals with this disease may show one or more of these signs, but the pathogen may 
still be present in the absence of any signs. 
Disease signs at the farm, tank or pond level are: 
• 
whitish postlarvae 
• 
lethargy 
• 
mortality occurring 2 to 3 days after infection of the first postlarva in larval rearing tanks 
• 
mortality of up to 95% within 5 days after the appearance of the first gross signs. 
Gross pathological signs are: 
• 
particularly milky and opaque abdomen (tail), starting at the tail extremity (telson region) and 
gradually progressing towards the head 
• 
appearance in the tanks of abnormal floating moults that resemble mica flakes 
• 
degeneration of telson and uropods (in severe cases)

Infection with Macrobrachium rosenbergii nodavirus 
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
2 
• 
white colouration of abdominal muscle. 
Microscopic pathological signs are: 
• 
acute Zenker's necrosis of striated muscles, characterised by severe hyaline degeneration, 
necrosis and muscular lysis 
• 
pathognomonic basophilic intracytoplasmic inclusion bodies in infected muscle tissues. 
Disease agent 
Also known as white tail disease or white muscle disease, this disease is caused by infection with 
Macrobrachium rosenbergii nodavirus (MrNV) and extra small virus (XSV). MrNV is a member of the 
family Nodaviridae. MrNV and XSV are both associated with the disease, but their respective roles 
are uncertain. These viruses are known to occur in fresh and brackish water. 
Host range 
MrNV causes disease mainly in giant freshwater prawns (Macrobrachium rosenbergii). However, 
several species of penaeids and red claw crayfish may be asymptomatic carriers of the virus, and 
Artemia and various species of aquatic insects are known vectors that can carry MrNV. 
Table 1 Species known to be susceptible to infection with MrNV 
Common name 
Scientific name 
Black tiger prawn 
Penaeus monodon 
Giant freshwater prawna 
Macrobrachium rosenbergii 
Indian banana prawn 
Penaeus (Fenneropenaeus) indicus 
Kuruma prawn 
Penaeus (Marsupenaeus) japonicus 
Pacific white shrimp 
Penaeus (Litopenaeus) vannamei 
Penaeids 
Various genera and species 
Red claw crayfish 
Cherax quadricarinatus 
a Naturally susceptible. Note: Other species are known carriers or potential carriers of the virus. 
Table 2 Non-decapod crustacean carriers 
Common name 
Scientific name 
Aquatic insectsa 
Various genera and species 
Brine shrimp 
Artemia salina 
a Naturally susceptible. Note: Other species have been shown to be experimentally susceptible.

Infection with Macrobrachium rosenbergii nodavirus 
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
3 
Presence in Australia 
White tail disease has been officially reported in giant freshwater prawns in north Queensland. 
Map 1 Presence of MrNV, by jurisdiction 
 
Epidemiology 
• 
Very few postlarvae showing the clinical signs of white tail disease survive. Those that survive 
seem to grow normally in grow-out ponds. 
• 
Outbreaks most commonly occur in larvae, postlarvae and early juveniles. Adult life stages are 
resistant and act as carriers. 
• 
Transmission is both vertical (direct passage from parents to offspring via eggs) and horizontal 
(from virus present in the water surrounding susceptible prawns or direct contact with an 
infected prawn). 
• 
Mortality rates are variable and reach up to 95%. 
• 
Some penaeid shrimp, crayfish, Artemia and aquatic insects are vectors of white tail disease. 
Differential diagnosis 
The list of similar diseases in the next section refers only to the diseases covered by this field guide. 
Gross pathological signs may also be representative of diseases not included in this guide. Do not rely 
on gross signs to provide a definitive diagnosis. Use them as a tool to help identify the listed diseases 
that most closely account for the observed signs. 
The clinical signs described and shown here may also be symptomatic of other bacterial or viral 
infections, or poor water quality. Further laboratory examination is needed for a definitive diagnosis. 
Similar diseases 
Infection with infectious myonecrosis virus (IMNV) and infection with shrimp haemocyte iridescent 
virus (SHIV).

Infection with Macrobrachium rosenbergii nodavirus 
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
4 
Sample collection 
Only trained personnel should collect samples. Using only gross pathological signs to differentiate 
between diseases is not reliable, and some aquatic animal disease agents pose a risk to humans. If 
you are not appropriately trained, phone your state or territory hotline number and report your 
observations. If you have to collect samples, the agency taking your call will advise you on the 
appropriate course of action. Local or district fisheries or veterinary authorities may also advise on 
sampling. 
Emergency disease hotline 
See something you think is this disease? Report it. Even if you’re not sure. 
Call the Emergency Animal Disease Watch Hotline on 1800 675 888. They will refer you to the right 
state or territory agency. 
Further reading 
CABI Invasive Species Compendium White tail disease 
CEFAS International Database on Aquatic Animal Diseases White tail disease 
World Organisation for Animal Health Manual of diagnostic tests for aquatic animals 
These hyperlinks were correct at the time of publication. 
Contact details 
Emergency Animal Disease Watch Hotline 1800 675 888 
Email AAH@agriculture.gov.au 
Website agriculture.gov.au/pests-diseases-weeds/aquatic 
© Commonwealth of Australia 2020 
This work is copyright. It may be reproduced in whole or in part subject to the inclusion of an acknowledgement of 
the source and no commercial usage or sale.