Infection with ostreid herpesvirus-1 microvariant 
(OsHV-1 µvar) 
Also known as Pacific oyster mortality syndrome (POMS) 
From Aquatic animal diseases significant to Australia: identification field guide, 5th edition 
Figure 1 Juvenile Pacific oysters (Crassostrea gigas) infected with OsHV-1 μvar 
 
Note: Large number of dead juvenile oysters resulting from mass mortality due to infection with OsHV-1 μvar. 
Source: The University of Sydney 
Signs of disease 
Important: Animals with this disease may show one or more of these signs, but the pathogen may 
still be present in the absence of any signs. 
Disease signs at the farm, tank or pond level are: 
• 
rapid and high cumulative mortalities in Pacific oysters, approaching 100% within 8 to 10 days of 
infection. 
Gross pathological signs are: 
• 
cessation of feeding and swimming by larvae, which exhibit velar lesions 
• 
gaping in adults 
• 
pale digestive gland in spat and older oysters. 
Microscopic pathological signs are: 
• 
ulcerative and erosive lesions in the connective tissue of mantle, gills, labial palps and digestive 
tissue 
• 
nuclear hypertrophy, nuclear chromatin margination and pyknosis 
• 
inflammatory changes ranging from mild and localised, to severe and extensive.

Infection with ostreid herpesvirus -1 microvariant 
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
2 
Disease agent 
POMS is caused by infection with a microvariant genotype of ostreid herpesvirus-1 
(OsHV-1 µvar).The virus is the only member of the genus Ostreavirus (family Malacoherpesviridae, 
order Herpesvirales). 
Host range 
Pacific oysters and Portuguese oysters are known to be susceptible to infection with OsHV-1 µvar. 
Multiple bivalve species (cupped oysters, flat oysters, clams, scallops) are known to be susceptible to 
other genotypes of OsHV-1. Several of these may also act as carriers and reservoirs for the 
microvariant strains. 
Table 1 Species known to be susceptible to infection with OsHV-1 µvar 
Common name 
Scientific name 
Blue mussel 
Mytilus edulis 
Hairy mussels 
Trichomya hirsuta 
Mediterranean mussel 
Mytilus galloprovincialis 
Pacific oystera 
Crassostrea gigas 
Portuguese oystera 
Crassostrea angulata 
Sydney cockle or mud arc 
Anadara trapezia 
Sydney rock oyster 
Saccostrea glomerata 
a Naturally susceptible. Note: Other species have been shown to be potential reservoir hosts. 
Table 2 Non-bivalve carriers 
Common name 
Scientific name 
Barnacles 
Balanus spp. 
Mud whelks 
Pyrazus spp., Batillaria spp.

Infection with ostreid herpesvirus -1 microvariant 
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
3 
Presence in Australia 
Outbreaks of POMS due to infection with OsHV-1 μvar have been officially reported from oyster 
growing areas in several regions of New South Wales and Tasmania. Pacific oysters infected with 
OsHV-1 μvar have also been reported from wild Pacific oysters in Port Adelaide in South Australia. 
Map 1 Presence of OsHV-1 μvar, by jurisdiction 
 
Epidemiology 
• 
The disease can affect all age groups of susceptible oysters. There may be higher mortality in the 
younger life stages. 
• 
Higher mortality appears to be associated with higher water temperature and crowding. 
• 
Infected adult oysters may be a source of infection for larvae or spat. However, it is not certain if 
true vertical transmission occurs. Horizontal transmission has been demonstrated. 
• 
Some adult Crassostrea gigas may survive with subclinical OsHV-1 infections, and act as carriers 
of the virus. 
• 
The introduction of OsHV-1 µvar into new areas is thought to be due to introduction of infected 
hosts or carriers in biofouling on shipping, often followed by human movements of subclinically 
infected oysters. 
• 
Water filtration reduces risk of disease entry into hatcheries, suggesting spread of the disease 
within a water body may be due to movements of infected oyster larvae or free virus adhered to 
plankton or other particles. 
Differential diagnosis 
The list of similar diseases in the next section refers only to the diseases covered by this field guide. 
Gross pathological signs may also be representative of diseases not included in this guide. Do not rely 
on gross signs to provide a definitive diagnosis. Use them as a tool to help identify the listed diseases 
that most closely account for the observed signs.

Infection with ostreid herpesvirus -1 microvariant 
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
4 
Similar diseases 
Iridoviroses. 
Sample collection 
Only trained personnel should collect samples. Using only gross pathological signs to differentiate 
between diseases is not reliable, and some aquatic animal disease agents pose a risk to humans. If 
you are not appropriately trained, phone your state or territory hotline number and report your 
observations. If you have to collect samples, the agency taking your call will advise you on the 
appropriate course of action. Local or district fisheries or veterinary authorities may also advise on 
sampling. 
Emergency disease hotline 
See something you think is this disease? Report it. Even if you’re not sure. 
Call the Emergency Animal Disease Watch Hotline on 1800 675 888. They will refer you to the right 
state or territory agency. 
Microscope images 
Figure 2 Histological section of a Pacific oyster (Crassostrea gigas) infected with OsHV-1 μvar 
 
Note: High viral load causing multifocal to coalescing ulceration with attenuation of epithelium and pyknotic nuclei (a). 
20x magnification. 
Source: M Gabor

Infection with ostreid herpesvirus -1 microvariant 
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
5 
Figure 3 In-situ hybridisation of gill of Pacific oyster (Crassostrea gigas) infected with OsHV-1 µvar 
 
Note: Massive infection of epithelia and connective tissues (black staining). Scale bar 10µm. 
Source: C Jenkins 
Figure 4 In-situ hybridisation of gonad of Pacific oyster (Crassostrea gigas) infected with 
OsHV-1 µvar 
 
Note: Viral infection (black staining) in many eggs. Scale bar 10µm. 
Source: C Jenkins

Infection with ostreid herpesvirus -1 microvariant 
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
6 
Further reading 
CEFAS International Database on Aquatic Animal Diseases Infection with ostreid herpesvirus 1 
microvariant 
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment AQUAVETPLAN disease strategy manual: 
Ostreid herpesvirus 1 microvariant 
World Organisation for Animal Health Manual of diagnostic tests for aquatic animals 
These hyperlinks were correct at the time of publication. 
Contact details 
Emergency Animal Disease Watch Hotline 1800 675 888 
Email AAH@agriculture.gov.au 
Website agriculture.gov.au/pests-diseases-weeds/aquatic 
© Commonwealth of Australia 2020 
This work is copyright. It may be reproduced in whole or in part subject to the inclusion of an acknowledgement of 
the source and no commercial usage or sale.