You must meet our requirements before exporting livestock from Australia. This includes having a
livestock export licence and:
an approved arrangement and approved export program; or
an exemption as a small and infrequent exporter.
Follow these steps to become a livestock exporter.
You must apply to us for a new:
You may be able to apply for an exemption to an AA or AEP. Find out if you are eligible to apply for an
exemption.
If you are a new exporter, you may make an application for your livestock export licence online via the 
Export Service.
You can also apply to renew or vary a livestock export licence online via the Export Service. You will
need to create an account to use the service.
Get set up in the Export Service
Once you are set up in the Export Service, you will need to connect it to TRACE. For more information,
go to About export licence applications in the Export Service.
If you can’t access the Export Service or would prefer to use the application form, you can still use the
Application for a new livestock export licence, approved arrangement or approved export program:
Download
If you have difficulty accessing these files, contact us for help.
Prepare financial information
You must include financial information in your application.
We require an audited:
asset and liability statement for the previous financial year
profit and loss statement for the previous financial year.
We look for evidence to show you are financially viable.
Get a National Police Certificate
We conduct a fit and proper person test on applicants for new livestock export licences. To support this
process, you must provide an individual National Police Certificate for:
the applicant, and
• 
• 
• 
• 
•

all persons who manage or control the export operations.
The National Police Certificate must be issued by an Australian Criminal Intelligence Commission
accredited body within the 6 month period prior to submitting your application.
Further requirements will apply when you renew or vary your livestock export licence.
Develop your proposed approved arrangement (AA)
Use the application for an approved arrangement or approved export program form to apply for these
requirements.
Draft your AA. We provide guidelines and information to assist with drafting your approved
arrangement.
Your AA must cover the relevant types of exports you propose to export to, including all:
markets
species
classes of livestock
modes of transport.
Your AA must include a standard export plan (SEP) for each proposed export market and species to be
exported.
Develop your proposed approved export program (AEP)
Draft your AEP. We provide guidelines and information to assist with drafting your approved export
program.
AEPs are specific to components of consignment, including the market, species and class.
The 3 core components of an AEP are:
governance arrangements of the exporter, including exporter information and record keeping
instructions for land-based accredited veterinarians for pre-export activities
instructions for accredited veterinarians accompanying voyages by sea.
Submit
Complete the relevant sections of the application for a new livestock export licence, approved
arrangement or approved export program form.
Ensure your application includes:
financial statement information
an individual National Police Certificate issued by the AFP, for yourself and all persons who
manage or control the export operations
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
•

proposed AA and all supporting documents
proposed AEP and all supporting documents.
Submit your application to livestockexp@aff.gov.au.
Assessment
We will contact you if we need more information.
We assess applications in accordance with our client service standards. We will inform you of your
application status if there are delays.
See our service standards.
We will notify you in writing as to the outcome of your application.
Initial audit of your approved arrangement
Before we can approve a new AA, we will audit your business system. This audit will be on the
procedures set out in your AA and AEP.
Export licence period
We will consider your application and determine the length of your licence, between 1 and 5 years.
Access to TRACE is in the Export Service. To submit or manage Notices of Intention (NOIs), you will
need to create an account.
Get set up in the Export Service
Follow our step-by-step guide TRACE onboarding to the Export Service.
After your account is set up, you need to connect TRACE to the Export Service.
You need an approved Exporter Supply Chain Assurance System (ESCAS) before you can export feeder
or slaughter livestock. ESCAS does not apply to breeder livestock.
Find out how to apply for, vary and maintain an approved ESCAS.
Once you complete these steps you can submit a Notice of Intention (NOI) in TRACE. TRACE is
accessed in the Export Service. You will need to create an account to use the service.
Get set up in the Export Service
Follow our step-by-step guide TRACE onboarding to the Export Service.
After your account is set up, you need to connect TRACE to the Export Service.
• 
•

To continue to export livestock you need to meet certain requirements.
Find out how to maintain your:
approved arrangement
approved export program (AEP)
export licence
ESCAS.
Fees and charges apply for exporting livestock.
We apply fees and charges for consignments, licences and registrations.
We also apply an annual charge to export livestock under an AA. The amounts depend on whether you
export by sea or air.
See more about our charging guidelines.
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/export/controlled-goods/live-animals/livestock/exporters/
become-livestock-exporter
• 
• 
• 
•