You can prepare livestock for export if you are a licensed exporter and have an approved arrangement
(AA) and approved export program (AEP) in place. You can also prepare livestock for export if you have
a small and infrequent (S&I) exemption to these requirements. 
You must export in line with your approvals and follow requirements outlined in our regulatory
framework.
We charge a fee for most steps of the exporting livestock process. This fee is time-based for some steps.
See our charging guidelines.
Use our quick-find reference tables to locate more departmental webpages, documents and information
relevant to livestock exports.
Follow these steps to prepare your livestock consignment for export.
Micor (Live Animals) sets out the known importing country requirements. You must meet these
requirements to export live animals from Australia.
Access Micor
Apply for a login to access Micor information related to exporting livestock.
You must check Micor and any import permit conditions prior to each consignment.
Importing countries may change their requirements without notice and may not inform us. It is your
responsibility to check requirements directly with the relevant government authority of the importing
country.
For multiple use import permits, you must manage the quota. You do not need to provide us with this
information unless we request it.
Requirements not listed
Sometimes a country or livestock commodity is not listed on Micor. In this case, the importing country
requirements are set out in the import permit. You must get a valid import permit from the relevant
destination country authority.
Changes to requirements
If requirements change and these have been agreed to, we will update Micor. If you receive
requirements that are different to Micor, please contact us immediately.
Once these changes have been agreed, you must update your AA and AEP to address them.

Some countries require pre-export isolation or quarantine. Our requirements depend on method of
transport. For:
air consignments, we must approve the premises before the start of isolation. You must submit
the NOI at least 10 business days before the start of isolation.
sea consignments, check importing requirements. Otherwise, follow Australian Standards for the
Export of Livestock (ASEL) requirements.
You must have an approved exporter supply chain assurance system (ESCAS) to export feeder or
slaughter livestock. You must identify the relevant ESCAS approval on your NOI. This is not required
for breeder livestock.
You must submit your Notice of Intention to export (NOI) in TRACE via the Export Service. If you
haven’t already, you will need to create an account to use the service.
Get set up in the Export Service
Follow our step-by-step guide TRACE onboarding to the Export Service.
After your account is set up, you need to connect TRACE to the Export Service.
You must submit an NOI for each consignment.
You must submit your NOI the earlier of (and at least):
10 business days before quarantine or isolation begins, or
10 business days before the consignment is proposed to be exported.
This timeframe also applies to reactivation of NOIs that have been placed ‘on hold’ in TRACE.
In some cases, we can accept NOIs with less than 10 business days’ notice. This will depend on the NOI
details and our availability to service the consignment. Please contact us to discuss if you are in this
situation.
Contingency plans
In accordance with Australian Standards for the Export of Livestock (ASEL), contingency plans must be
prepared in writing for each livestock consignment.
For consignments by sea to the Middle East, a contingency plan must be provided to the department at
the time of NOI submission, or when otherwise requested by the department. We may also make ad hoc
requests for contingency plans for livestock consignments exported to the Middle East by air.
Learn more about these requirements in the contingency plans for livestock consignments to the
Middle East policy:
• 
• 
• 
•

Download
Contingency plans for livestock consignments to the Middle East (PDF 190 KB)
Contingency plans for livestock consignments to the Middle East (DOCX 240 KB)
If you have difficulty accessing these files, contact us for help.
Alternative export arrangements under ASEL
In some cases, you can apply for alternative export arrangements under ASEL. These apply to a specific
consignment only. You can apply when you submit your NOI.
Find out how to apply for alternative export arrangements under ASEL.
We may approve alternative pen space as part of your AA for some markets. You must self-assess if your
consignment is eligible as per our alternative minimum pen space allocation policy.
Other exemptions
In some cases, you can apply for exemptions from other requirements. These may apply to a specific
consignment only.
Accredited stockpersons and veterinarians
ASEL requires an accredited stockperson to accompany all livestock voyages. See LiveCorp Accredited
stockpersons for more information.
We will inform you if a shipboard accredited veterinarian (AAV) must accompany the consignment. See 
when we may require a shipboard AAV.
We assess each NOI and notify you in TRACE if we approve it.
We will contact you if we require further information or market specific documents. Examples include a
heat stress risk assessment (HSRA) or residency check requirements.
We will inform you if we require an independent observer to accompany your livestock voyage by sea.
Note that the approval of the NOI does not necessarily mean that we will issue the export permit and
health certificate. These will only be issued once we are satisfied that the livestock have been prepared
in accordance with the importing country's requirements and comply with Australian export legislation.
Note that we may revoke the approval of your NOI if you provide false, misleading, or incomplete
information or documents to us.
If there are changes to your consignment you must update your NOI. To do this, you need to apply to
vary an NOI in TRACE.
Access to TRACE is through the Export Service. You will need to create an account to use the service.
• 
•

Get set up in the Export Service
Follow our step-by-step guide TRACE onboarding to the Export Service.
After your account is set up, you need to connect TRACE to the Export Service.
The NOI should be as accurate as possible. You should make a variation as soon as you know the
information is out of date.
We will contact you by email if we need more information.
You must carry out pre-export preparations in accordance with your AA and AEP.
You must contact us if:
importing country requirements change
your operations are no longer reflected in your AA and/or AEP.
Email livestockexp@aff.gov.au.
In some circumstances, you may be able to source livestock for export where the property of origin is a
registered establishment. These livestock are called ‘stock on hand’.
More information is in our ‘stock on hand’ policy which applies to consignments that are exported on or
after 1 August 2024.
Download
'Stock on hand’ in registered establishments for livestock exports (PDF 641 KB)
‘Stock on hand’ in registered establishments for livestock exports (DOCX 1.87 MB)
If you have difficulty accessing these files, contact us for help.
Pre-export preparation and inspection
An AAV must carry out the activities outlined in your AEP including inspecting your consignment. This
must occur before our regional veterinary officer (RVO) inspects the consignment.
You must remove ineligible livestock from the consignment before the RVO inspection. ASEL has
requirements for managing reject livestock.
Before you apply for an export permit and health certificate (EPHC) you must have all pre-export
documentation as outlined in your AA and AEP.
We base export document requirements prior to export on the:
exporter's performance level
specific export market
We can also request you provide additional documentation if required.
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
•

Exporter performance level
We base the documents you must provide prior to export on your performance level. Information on
performance levels can be found in the performance management and compliance guidelines.
If you are a provisional exporter, you must provide all documentation prior to export.
Specific export market
Export documents include core and non-core documents.
Core documents are the minimum documents we require you to provide the RVO prior to export if you
have an AA and AEP. The core documents list and importing country requirements are subject to
change(s) at any time. You must check requirements for each market before you start the export
process. We can also request you provide additional documentation (including non-core documents) if
required.
If a market has no agreed importing country requirements in place, the core documents list is indicative
only. You must contact our regional office to find out what documentation you must present.
The required documents should be uploaded to the relevant NOI on TRACE. The RVO can then
consider issuing the export permit and health certificate (EPHC).
Download
Core documents for approved arrangement livestock exports (PDF 196 KB)
Core documents for approved arrangement livestock exports (DOCX 757 KB)
If you have difficulty accessing these files, contact us for help.
Pre-export documentation requirements
This table provides some general information on what we require from you to demonstrate compliance
with our requirements. This table is general information only, not specific to any market and not an
exhaustive list. You must make sure you hold all documents as per your AA demonstrating compliance
with our regulatory framework before export.
Document description
Key requirements
Import permit and certified translation from the competent authority
(where relevant). This includes the import health conditions for the
market (where relevant).
Dispensation from the competent authority linked to a valid import
permit (where relevant). This includes transit permits from any relevant
transit countries and accredited translations (where relevant)
National vendor declarations/waybills completed in accordance with
state and territory requirements
• 
•

Property of origin (POO) clearances from the state or territory
government
Download
If you have difficulty
accessing these files, contact
us for help.
Download
If you have difficulty
accessing these files, contact
us for help.
Vendor declarations completed correctly covering the importing country
requirements and ASEL
Isolation declaration from the establishment or premises operator
covering the importing country requirements and ASEL (where
relevant)
Laboratory test reports (including details and results)
Download
If you have difficulty
accessing these files, contact
us for help.
Pregnancy declaration or spay certification (where relevant)
AAV health/welfare declaration
Test and treatment details and declarations from the relevant persons
as per the AA/AEP
Reject list for livestock still in the RE (where relevant)
Disinfectant declarations from the land transport companies and/or the
master of the vessel (where relevant)
Final tag list to be attached to the health certificate(s) for the
consignment
Load plan and weights including the preliminary and final load plan,
final number of head and final weights (at final sign off). This also
includes crate dimensions for air consignments.
Water deprivation plan (air only)
The required documents should be uploaded to the relevant NOI on TRACE. The RVO will assess these
when making a decision to issue the EPHC.
Exporters must ensure that all documents are complete and correct and are able to demonstrate
compliance with our regulatory framework prior to submitting an application for the EPHC.

Where you identify issues with documentation collected from third parties that draws into question the
eligibility of the livestock for export, you must seek to have these corrected prior to export. In some
cases, you may be able to provide supporting information to the RVO to demonstrate compliance with
our regulatory framework for the purposes of issuing an EPHC. For example, if the truck driver section
of an NT Waybill has not been completed, you may be able to provide intake records from the registered
establishment showing arrival information as supporting evidence.
You must ensure that all information and documentation you provide to us is true and accurate.
You need an export permit and health certificate (EPHC) for each export consignment.
Complete your application form for an EPHC. Submit the form on TRACE.
Let us know if there are changes to your consignment. It may invalidate your issued export permit and
health certificate.
For more information, contact your local regional office.
Our RVOs inspect all livestock consignments before export. Arrange your inspection through our 
regional office in your state or territory
Inspections are usually done within 72 hours of departure. This may change due to importing country
requirements.
The inspections take place at:
registered establishments for livestock to be exported by sea
approved premises for most livestock to be exported by air
other premises for livestock if an approved premise is not required.
The inspection ensures that livestock for export meet the:
Australian Standards for the Export of Livestock (ASEL)
importing country requirements
legislative requirements
exporter’s AA and AEP.
We may require the stopping of moving or loading livestock in the initial stages of a suspicion or
detection of an exotic animal disease, infection or infestation in Australia.
We will issue your EPHC after you have met all our requirements.
Our description on the EPHC only identifies the species of livestock. We do not identify the breed as
this is a commercial matter.
We will also issue your consignment a rating as per the Performance Management and Compliance
Guidelines. These ratings are known as livestock export consignment reports (LECR). They inform your
exporter performance level.
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
•

We will note concerns or issues identified during the inspection and let you know in writing.
We charge a fee for the EPHC. See our charging guidelines.
Circumstances may change after we issue the consignment documentation. We may need to revoke and
reissue the EPHC. Please contact us to discuss as soon able possible if this may apply to your
consignment.
Once you receive the EPHC you can export your consignment.
Notifiable incidents
We outline notifiable incidents for livestock export conveyances in ASEL. Examples include, but are not
limited to:
mechanical issues impacting animal health or welfare
feed or water shortage
diagnosis or reasonable suspicion of an emergency disease in a consignment
rejection of livestock by an importing country government.
If a notifiable incident occurs at any time, contact us as soon as possible and in any case, within 12
hours. While we are reviewing and responding to the incident, you are responsible for activating any
contingency plans prepared as per ASEL.
Notifiable incident reports
Some incidents require you to submit a report to us. See ASEL for more information.
Email the report to livestockexp@aff.gov.au.
Returning to Australia
In some cases, livestock loaded onto a vessel or aircraft for export may need unloading back into
Australia. Unloading of livestock from a conveyance must only occur with our approval.
To allow unloading, we need to assess the biosecurity risks of the situation. We will require information
from you to undertake this process.
Among other things, we need to verify if the livestock could have been exposed to a disease or pest that
may compromise Australia’s highly favourable animal, plant, and human health status. This is
consistent with the process for other goods returning to Australia. If biosecurity risks are identified, we
may require you to take measures and/or comply with directions or other obligations under the
Biosecurity Act 2015.
These measures may include, but are not limited to:
identifying suitable quarantine facilities to transport the livestock to or from the vessel
• 
• 
• 
• 
•

isolating unloaded livestock from other livestock, if present, in the quarantine facility
daily veterinary inspections
use of personal protective equipment
cleaning of equipment, vehicles, and/or properties with certain products.
We will inform you if any measures change.
Master’s report
The master of the livestock vessel must provide a copy of the 'master’s report carriage of livestock' to us
and the Australian Maritime Safety Authority (AMSA). They must provide it after the voyage.
Further information on the format and required recipients can be found on the AMSA website.
Email the report to livestockexp@aff.gov.au.
ASEL reporting
Under ASEL, you must provide us with regulatory reports for all livestock consignments.
Reports include:
daily reports (where applicable) for livestock exported by sea
end-of-voyage report for livestock exported by sea
end-of-journey report for livestock exported by air.
LIVEXCollect
Use the LIVEXCollect forms for your reports. It is a LiveCorp-administered data collection and
management system. It is the approved form by us for meeting your ASEL reporting requirements.   
The use of LIVEXCollect supports:
our regulatory functions
LiveCorp activities such as the research and service body for the livestock export industry.
For more information on LIVEXCollect, visit the LiveCorp website.
Register
Register for access to LIVEXCollect by emailing livexcollect@livecorp.com.au.
Submit
Complete and submit these forms within the timeframes in ASEL.
Email completed forms to livestockexp@aff.gov.au and livexcollect@livecorp.com.au.
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
•

Support
Contact LIVEXCollect for any support or training to use the program.
Email livexcollect@livecorp.com.au.
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/export/controlled-goods/live-animals/livestock/exporters/
exporting-livestock-consignments