1 
FUNCTIONS AND 
OPERATIONS OF THE 
SEPTEMBER 2024 
Report to the Minister 
This report does not constitute legal advice 
and legal advice should be sought before 
relying on any advice in this report that may 
have legal implications. 
AUSTRALIAN PESTICIDES 
AND VETERINARY 
MEDICINES AUTHORITY

2 
INTRODUCTION 
In May 2024 Thoughtpost Governance was commissioned to undertake a review of the functions and 
operations of the Board of the Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority (APVMA), in 
accordance with Section 27K of the Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals (Administration) Act 1992.  
The APVMA is a Corporate Commonwealth Entity and is the independent statutory authority responsible for 
the assessment, registration and regulation up to point of sale of agricultural and veterinary chemicals in 
Australia. 
The APVMA Board is the governing body and Accountably Authority of the APVMA and is responsible for 
ensuring the proper, efficient and effective performance of the APVMA’s functions and determining the 
objectives, strategies and policies of the APVMA. 
Our review encompassed a broad range of governance documents pertaining to the APVMA, as well as 
interviews with the Board members, executives, the chair of the Audit and Risk Committee of the APVMA, as 
and Forestry, and the chair of Food Standards Australia New Zealand. A list of interviewees is included as 
Attachment A to this report. 
It is important to note that, as required by the Act, we have limited our review to the functions and operations 
of the Board of the APVMA. In that regard it has been brought to our attention that the legislative 
environment in which the Board operates is not assisting it in effectively carrying out its functions and 
operations. We have made recommendations in relation to potential legislative changes. These 
recommendations should be read in the context that we are not legal practitioners, and that a comprehensive 
legal review should be undertaken to support any potential legislative changes. 
Several reviews of the APVMA have been conducted in the last 2 years. We have reviewed those reports to 
inform our work (refer Attachment B). In addition, a list of reference materials used to inform our 
recommendations is also included in Attachment B. 
The legislation provides for the Board to have a total of 5 members. At the time of our review the Board 
comprised the then Acting Chair, 2 Board members and the then Acting CEO in an ex-officio capacity.  
A new Chair was appointed in July 2024, bringing the Board up to its full complement of 5 members. In July 
2024 a new CEO for the APVMA was also appointed. 
This report reviews the various functions and operations of the Board, identifies the key issues and makes 
recommendations for improvements.

3 
The report is structured using the Four Functions of a Board. See figure 1, below. 
Figure 1 – Four Functions of a Board 
In conducting our review, we have taken into account the legislative governance framework in which the 
APVMA operates, including: 
The Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals (Administration) Act 1992 (Administration Act) 
The Public Governance, Performance and Accountability Act 2013 (PGPA Act) 
The Public Service Act 1999.

4 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
Our review of the functions and operations of the APVMA Board comprised a review of available 
documentation, including recent reviews of the APVMA, and interviews with a broad range of stakeholders 
(see Attachment A). 
Our key findings are: 
The Board was introduced in early 2022 following several external reviews. Since that time the Board 
has been distracted from attending to its core responsibilities as it has been focused on responding 
to numerous recommendations for improvement from those reviews.  
Personnel changes in the executive team and Board, in addition to the external reviews, have resulted 
in a protracted induction process for the Board. This has not helped the Board to fulfil its duties and 
provide constructive advice and challenge to the executive team, making it difficult for the Board to 
establish its value in the eyes of the executive team. 
Over the last 12 months appropriate administrative arrangements and documentation have been put 
in place for the Board. These have contributed to the effective functioning of the Board. 
The Board is understaffed to allow it to succeed in its role. Even with a full Board complement of 5 
members, there are insufficient Board members to enable it to effectively set up sub-committees that 
can undertake some of the work of the Board and reduce the workload at Board meetings. 
The Board was created in March 2022 and took over as Accountable Authority from the CEO. This 
has resulted in a complex legislative structure. In order to succeed, the Board needs to have effective 
working relationships with several stakeholders, including the Minister, DAFF, the CEO and the Audit 
and Risk Committee. 
There appears to be a genuine willingness on the part of the Minister, DAFF, the APVMA Board, the 
Audit and Risk Committee and the CEO to work together to enable the APVMA to fulfil its regulatory 
obligations. 
Changing the legislation to give the Board the power to discharge its duties as the Accountable 
Authority would seem the most appropriate course of action for the long term success of the APVMA. 
The current legislation, whereby the Board and APVMA are separate entities, relies on the CEO 
implementing the decisions of the Board at the APVMA. 
In the short term we recommend that the legislation be amended to allow for additional board 
members to be appointed. This would give the Board access to a broader range of skills and enable 
the delegation of some of the Board’s workload to sub-committees. We also recommend that the CEO 
be removed from the Board as an ex-officio member. 
We have made various recommendations in the body of our report that we believe will significantly enhance 
the ability of the Board to discharge its responsibilities as the Accountable Authority of the APVMA.

5 
PERFORMING 
In assessing the way the board performs, we focus on the clarity of its role, capabilities, processes and 
culture, as well as the way it assesses its own performance and that of its members and sub-committees. 
ROLE CLARITY 
The Board was established in March 2022 and designated as the Accountable Authority under the 
Public Governance, Performance and Accountability Act 2013 (PGPA Act). Prior to the introduction of 
the Board, the CEO was the Accountable Authority of the APVMA. 
Many of the issues relating to the clarity of the role of the Board stem from the lack of clarity in its 
implementation, and subsequent confusion regarding the Board's authority, and formal reporting 
requirements. 
Under the Administration Act, the Board and the APVMA are set up as separate entities. The Board is 
specifically excluded from exercising the regulatory functions and powers of the APVMA (which are 
exercised by the CEO). Policy oversight and administration of the legislation for the APVMA are the 
responsibility of DAFF. 
The APVMA has an Audit and Risk Committee that pre-dates the Board and consists of 3 independent 
members. An APVMA Board member has been added to that Committee. 
Since its inception the Board has operated in a complex environment, managing relationships with 
DAFF, the Minister, the CEO and executive, and the Audit and Risk Committee (ARC). 
This complexity has been exacerbated by several external reviews of the organisation, plus an 
external review of the Board’s performance. Some of these reviews have been conducted since the 
inception of the Board. 
Work has been undertaken by the APVMA to identify potential legislative changes that could improve 
the organisation’s governance arrangements.

6 
Recommendations in relation to role clarity 
1. There appear to be at least two possible approaches to the challenges currently faced by the APVMA: 
a. The legislation is comprehensively reviewed and redrafted to clarify the role of the Board as 
the Accountable Authority, providing it with the power to make all decisions in relation to 
the operation of the APVMA, clarifying its relationship with the CEO, DAFF and the Minister, 
and increasing the number of board members (see section on Board Capability, below). It is 
anticipated that this work could not be completed in the short term. 
b. The legislation is amended only to increase the number of board members from 5 to a 
minimum of 7, to enable the APVMA to expand the range of skills on the Board and create 
sub-committees to focus on key aspects of governance, enabling the Board to be more 
effective. We also recommend that the legislation be amended to remove the CEO as an ex-
officio member of the Board (See Recommendation 3, below). This approach is relatively 
easier and could be achieved in the short term. 
2. If approach b. is adopted, the Board can only function effectively if it builds appropriate working 
relationships with the Minister, DAFF and the CEO and executive. The key relationship will be the 
one between the Board (particularly the Chair) and the CEO. Whilst various powers (regulatory 
functions and powers, HR matters and appointments, financial delegations) will still vest with the 
CEO under the legislation, the Board needs to have full visibility and right of approval or veto as the 
Accountable Authority. 
3. Consideration should be given to appropriateness of the inclusion of the CEO as an ex-officio 
member of the Board. It is not uncommon for a CEO to be a member of the board, but having set up 
the Board as the Accountable Authority, it would seem more appropriate for the CEO to be reporting 
to the Board, and for the Board to be directing, advising, and mentoring the CEO. It would be easier 
for the Board and the Chair to maintain this relationship with the CEO if the CEO was not a member 
of the Board. The Australian Institute of Company Directors observes that there is a natural conflict 
of interest for executives to serve equally on the entity that supervises them. 
4. The ARC was originally set up as a separate entity reporting to the CEO, but should now become a 
sub-committee of the Board and be chaired by a Board member. Consideration should be given as 
to whether there is a need to have additional independent members on the ARC as well as 
independent board members. See recommendations on Board Committees below.

7 
CAPABILITY 
At the time of our review the Board comprised 4 members, providing limited opportunity for the 
Board to access the range of skills that it requires to function effectively. 
Having only 4 Board members limits the ability of the Board to set up sub-committees to take on 
some of the work of the Board. The use of sub-committees would provide a filtering mechanism for 
specific Board papers and allow the Board to focus on key matters such as culture, strategy and risk. 
At the time of our review the Board was lacking 1 member. Even with its full complement of 5 board 
members, it is a small board compared to most other Corporate Commonwealth Entities. 
At the time of our review the Board terms of all 3 of the independent Board members expire on 29 
March 2025.  
Recommendations in relation to capability 
1. The Board has recently conducted a skills self-assessment, but an assessment of board skills 
requirements, and the skills of existing board members should be undertaken in the short term by 
the newly appointed Chair.  
2. Legislation should be amended to increase the number of board members from 5 (including the CEO) 
to a minimum of 7 (excluding the CEO). An odd number provides a useful mechanism for resolving 
contentious issues without the need for the Chair to make a casting vote. This would still be a 
relatively small board for a Corporate Commonwealth Entity. According to the Auditor-General’s 
report (see Reference Material in Attachment B), the median number of board members ranges from 
7 to 9, with 75% of boards having between 6 and 10 members. 
3. The terms of appointment for board members should be staggered to ensure continuity when board 
terms expire and board members decide to retire or are not renewed. If the number of board 
members is expanded to 7, we recommend that they be staggered over 3 years so that 2 or 3 board 
members retire each year.

8 
BOARD CULTURE 
Since its inception, the Board has faced various challenges.,  
It is not clear from our discussions that the Board has had the opportunity to establish a defined 
culture in the way that it works internally and with other stakeholders, including DAFF and the 
Minister. 
Very limited formal induction was provided. This has resulted in board members not being as well 
equipped as they might be to interrogate and explore papers that are presented to the Board. This, 
in turn, impacts the perceived value of the Board in the eyes of the APVMA executive team. 
A formal induction process has now been developed for use with new Board members. This induction 
process is anticipated to take place over a 12-18 month period. 
Recommendations in relation to board culture 
1. A key priority for the incoming Chair should be the establishment of a desired board culture. It is 
anticipated that this will continue to mature as new board members are added. 
2. Changing the Board composition and skillsets will give the Board the ability to scrutinise and 
challenge the papers presented by the executive team. This will enhance the effectiveness of the 
Board as the Accountable Authority and help to establish its credibility with the APVMA’s executive 
team. 
3. A much shorter induction process (say 3 months) would be more appropriate, with additional 
education sessions being added for board members where required. 
BOARD & DIRECTOR PERFORMANCE 
The Board’s performance has been impacted by 2 external reviews in the last 2 years, as well as an 
external Board Performance Review that was conducted in November 2023. 
Much of the Board’s focus has been on considering and implementing the recommendations arising 
from the external reviews, rather than the core responsibilities of the Board.  
Core Board functions such as strategy, corporate planning and budgeting are not well addressed or 
coordinated. The Strategy 2030 document is more aspirational than a plan of action, and the 
Corporate Plan, rather than being an action-oriented subset of the Strategy for the current year, is 
acknowledged to be more of a compliance document. The budget appears to be done in isolation of 
the other planning elements.

9 
The external Board Performance Review identified a lack of constructive challenge of board papers 
by some board members. This is possibly a consequence of the current induction process and a 
resultant lack of familiarity with the detailed activities of the APVMA. 
The small number of Board members and lack of sub-committees results in very long board meetings 
with full agendas. This limits the ability of the Board to spend quality time on the key Board functions. 
Recommendations in relation to board and director performance 
1. Expanding the size of the Board will assist the Board to improve its performance of its functions 
under the Administration Act and as the Accountable Authority of the APVMA. 
2. We recommend that the Board meets monthly until it is satisfied that it is meeting its responsibilities 
and has established an appropriate work plan and cadence. 
3. According to APVMA’s Board Charter, a Board Performance Review is to be conducted every 3 years. 
We recommend that a review should be conducted on an annual basis for the next 2 years to assist 
the incoming Chair to identify challenges in relation to the functioning of the Board and the 
performance of individual directors. 
BOARD PROCESSES 
Over the last 12 months the Board has implemented appropriate processes in terms of agendas, 
minutes, action plans, annual work plan, management of conflicts, etc. A board secretariat has put in 
place sound processes to support the Board, including the compilation of board papers, and the 
establishment of appropriate Board Terms of Reference. 
Templates have recently been produced for board papers to assist executives in preparing board 
papers. This is still a work-in-progress as the executive team matures in understanding the 
information that is needed by the Board. The format and content of board papers is further 
complicated by the Board seeking more information than it would normally require, due to a lack of 
trust in the information it is being given.  
An annual calendar has been developed for board meetings. Up to 2 days have been scheduled for 
meetings every 2 months with a shorter meeting in September for the approval of the annual 
financial statements. 
The induction of the current board members is still in progress, with information sessions on 
different aspects of the APVMA’s activities being included in board meetings.

10 
Recommendations in relation to board processes 
1. Board processes are now sound and appear to be ably supported by the board secretariat. Processes 
are expected to continue to be developed as the relationship between the Board and executive 
matures. 
BOARD COMMITTEES 
The Audit and Risk Committee was in existence prior to the introduction of the Board and is 
comprised of 3 independent members (including an independent Chair). A board member has 
recently been added to the ARC. Prior to the introduction of the Board, the ARC reported to the CEO. 
There is a lack of clarity as to how the Board and the ARC relate to one another, resulting in possible 
duplication of effort, particularly in relation to financial governance and risk. 
The ARC meets quarterly and the ARC Chair reports to the Board on its activities and makes 
recommendations to the Board. 
A meeting has been scheduled in October 2024 for the Board and ARC to meet to discuss their 
respective roles and determine how they will work together. 
The Board has no other sub-committees. 
Recommendations in relation to board committees 
Board committees are a useful mechanism for delegating the work of the Board. The committees can 
consider relevant matters in detail and make recommendations to the Board for decision. This can free up 
time in the Board meetings to ensure that appropriate time can be allocated to core matters. 
1. Subject to increasing the size of the Board, the Board should determine which tasks could be 
delegated to Board sub-committees. Areas such as finance, risk, audit, people and remuneration and 
information technology are commonly delegated to board sub-committees.  
2. The tasks currently undertaken by the ARC could be delegated to a sub-committee chaired by an 
appropriately qualified Board member.  
3. Board committees should ideally be chaired by members of the Board. Each committee’s skills can 
be supplemented by the inclusion of independent members and members of the executive team as 
appropriate.

11 
DECISION MAKING  
In considering the decision-making function of the Board we have reviewed the way in which the Board 
functions in establishing the culture, strategy and risk environment in which decision making takes place. 
STRATEGIC PLANNING 
The Board has developed a Strategy 2030 document that sets out high level aspirational statements 
in relation to the future direction of the APVMA. This document appropriately identifies three 
separate horizons, each spanning 2–3 years during the 6 year outlook, but doesn’t identify specific 
actions that constitute a tangible strategy. Various other strategic documents have been developed 
in relation to an IT strategy and people strategy. 
From our discussions it is apparent that much of the Board’s focus has been on the actions arising 
from previous reviews of the organisation, as well as ensuring that compliance matters are being 
appropriately addressed. 
The Board recognises that work is required to identify the specific actions that will constitute the 
APVMA’s strategy for the next 3 years.  
Recommendations for Strategic Planning 
1. The Board should develop a Strategic Plan that comprises a vision as to where the organisation will 
be in 3 years’ time, along with the specific actions that will be taken to arrive at that desired end state. 
From this strategy the actions to be undertaken over the next 12 months should form the bulk of the 
Corporate Plan, inform the budget, and be the basis for KPI’s at all levels of the organisation from the 
Board down. 
CORPORATE PLAN 
From our review it would appear that the Corporate Plan comprises a compliance document rather 
than an action plan that will ensure that the organisation progresses its Strategic Plan over the next 
12 months. 
Recommendations for Corporate Plan 
1. Following the recommendations outlined above in relation to the Strategic Plan, the Corporate Plan 
could be made into a more useful document that outlines progress against the Strategic Plan, and 
directly links those actions to KPI’s and the budget.

12 
RISK MANAGEMENT 
The APVMA’s risk register was reportedly compiled by work teams at a low level in the organisation 
to be used by those teams in day-to-day decision making. As a result, it is very detailed and of limited 
use at the Board level. 
The detail and complexity of the risk register has made it hard to challenge from the Board’s 
perspective. There is possibly a lack of clarity at the executive level of the risk management needs of 
the Board. This could also be a result of confusion arising from similar scrutiny of risk by the Audit 
and Risk Committee. 
Recent work has been done by the executive and Board to identify enterprise level risks for 
monitoring at the executive and Board level. An executive owner has been allocated to each of those 
risks. This will enable appropriate consideration and scrutiny of risk by the Board. 
Risk has been a key focus of the Audit and Risk Committee, predating the formation of the Board. 
Recommendations for Risk Management  
1. Once the roles of the Board and the Audit and Risk Committee have been clarified (see section on 
Performing), the Board will be able to allocate an appropriate amount of time to monitoring of key 
risks and identifying emerging risks through its sub-committees. 
2. The Board should ensure that the risk culture and risk-based decision making continue to be a focus 
of the organisation through communication, training and induction programs. 
ORGANISATIONAL CULTURE 
The Board provides opportunities for executives and staff to present papers to the Board, and 
separate functions are arranged around Board meetings to provide staff with exposure to the Board. 
These all provide the Board with an opportunity to gain a sense of the culture of the organisation. 
The annual APS Staff Census is used to measure the success of cultural programs and determine 
employee satisfaction and engagement. 
Recommendations for organisational culture  
1. Setting the culture of the organisation should be one of the primary responsibilities of the Board. 
Having defined and established the desired culture, the task of monitoring the consistency of 
application of the culture throughout the organisation could be delegated to a Board sub-committee. 
The Committee could then review and filter the information provided to the Board to reduce the time 
spent in Board meetings.

13 
2. Pulse surveys should be used to supplement the APS Census (which is held annually) to provide more 
frequent insights into organisational culture and staff sentiment on key issues. 
3. Organisational culture should be one of the first priorities of the new Chair. 
STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT 
The Board has established a comprehensive 2023/24 Stakeholder Engagement and Communications 
Plan. 
Industry engagement by Board members has been limited to date. 
Recommendations for stakeholder engagement 
1. Additional industry engagement by Board members, through attending industry events and other 
stakeholder forums, would provide them with the opportunity to gain a better understanding of the 
APVMA’s role and its interaction with industry. It would also improve the ability of Board members 
to act in an advisory capacity to the CEO and executive team. 
LIMITATION ON POWERS 
Due to the lack of clarity in implementation, and subsequent confusion regarding the Board's 
authority and formal reporting requirements, it has been difficult for the Board to ensure that it is 
meeting its responsibilities as the Accountable Authority. Several important powers are exercised 
under the legislation exclusively by the CEO (regulatory powers, HR matters and appointments, 
financial delegations). 
This situation caused considerable difficulty when the Board was first established, but is now 
managed through the establishment of a good relationship between the Board and the CEO. 
Work has been undertaken by the APVMA to identify potential legislative changes that could be made 
to facilitate the effective functioning of the Board and clarify its relationship with the CEO. 
Recommendations in relation to limitations on the Board’s powers 
1. Refer to our earlier recommendations under ‘Performing’ relating to Role Clarity.

14 
MAJOR DECISIONS 
As outlined above, under the current legislation the Board doesn’t have the power to make a number 
of major decisions relating to the operations of the APVMA as it is designated as a separate entity to 
the APVMA. It relies on the CEO for the exercise of several key powers. 
Recommendations in relation to major decisions of the Board 
1. The Board should establish effective working relationships with the CEO and DAFF. These 
relationships will be essential to any future structure envisaged for the APVMA. Irrespective of any 
potential future legislative changes, the Board can make major decisions relating to the operation of 
APVMA, but only with the cooperation of the CEO and DAFF.

15 
ADVISING  
In reviewing this aspect of the functioning of the board, we focus on communication between Board and 
the executive team. 
Ideally a Board fulfils a dual role as both a governance board and advisory board. In its advisory capacity it 
provides a sounding board for the CEO as well as acting in a mentoring capacity. The Board, through its 
members, also provides access to specialist knowledge, experience and professional networks. 
The APVMA Board is currently operating substantially in the role of a governance board. It has 
necessarily been focused on the challenges and recommendations highlighted by various external 
reviews, and has had limited opportunity to establish itself in an advisory capacity. 
The presence of the CEO on the board in an ex-officio capacity significantly limits the ability of the 
Board to establish a distinction between the Board and the executive team led by the CEO. 
At the time of our review the Acting Chair had established an appropriate advisory and mentoring 
relationship with the Acting CEO through weekly conversations. 
Recommendations in relation to the advisory role of the Board  
For the CEO and executive team to recognise the value of the advisory aspect of the Board, the Board 
members must have the skills and experience to add value to the organisation. 
1. The critical relationship in establishing the Board in an advisory capacity is that between the Chair 
and the CEO. The APVMA is in an ideal position with the appointment of a new Chair and new CEO in 
July 2024 to establish a productive working relationship from the commencement of their 
appointment. 
2. Establishing the Board in an advisory role will be easier if it is decided to amend the legislation to 
exclude the CEO from the Board. 
3. If only limited legislative changes are made (see recommendations on Performing), then the 
relationship between the Chair and CEO is made more challenging by the need to balance the powers 
of the Board with the powers of the CEO (regulatory powers, HR matters and appointments, financial 
delegations). The Board can only fulfil its obligations as the Accountable Authority through effective 
cooperation with the CEO. 
4. Increasing the number of Board members to provide a greater breadth of experience will allow the 
Board to establish its credibility as a valued advisor to the CEO and executive team.

16 
MONITORING 
In assessing the monitoring function of a board we focus on the way in which the board oversees the 
organisation’s performance, capabilities, compliance requirements and accountability. 
MONITORING AND REPORTING FRAMEWORK  
Performance reporting is already a key focus for the Board. This continues to be a work-in-progress, 
but progress is being made to link performance measures to the organisational purpose and quality 
outcomes. 
From our discussions it appears that a lot of work has been put into assessing the capability of the 
staff from the executive team down through the organisation. The APVMA has been able to recruit a 
number of well credentialled executives from elsewhere in the public sector. 
The Board receives reports on compliance and accountability, but the quality of reporting is still a 
work in-progress, as is the ability of the Board to constructively challenge what is being presented.  
Recommendation for Monitoring and Reporting Framework 
1. Performance reporting to the Board should incorporate reporting against the Strategy and Corporate 
Plans, including the development and monitoring of KPIs for all levels of the organisation. 
2. The Board should have visibility of the capabilities and performance of the executive team. The CEO 
should summarise the executive performance reviews in a report to the Board following the annual 
performance approval process.  
3. The Board should be constructively challenging the compliance and accountability reports presented 
to it by the executive team. The Board’s ability to do this will be greatly enhanced if the Board has 
more members with a broader range of skills. In addition, as the focus of the Board moves from 
implementing recommendations to business as usual, the Board will have more time to focus on the 
Strategy, Corporate Plan, Budget (and budget cycle), and KPI setting.

17 
CONCLUSION 
The APVMA Board has faced a large number of challenges since its inception in March 2022. Organisational 
challenges have led to independent reviews of the organisation, and there have been personnel changes in 
both the executive team and the Board. 
Through this upheaval it has been difficult for the Board to focus on its core responsibilities, and due to the 
absence of an appropriate induction program it has been a slow process for the Board to get an effective 
understanding of the activities of the organisation. 
The legislative framework that governs the Board and the APVMA does not assist the Board in effectively 
fulfilling its duties. The split of responsibilities between the Board, the CEO, DAFF, the Minister and the ARC 
presents challenges and creates confusion. These issues are still in the process of being fully understood and 
addressed by the Board. 
Despite these challenges, there appears to be a genuine willingness of all the parties to work together to 
establish working arrangements that allow the APVMA to function effectively. 
From an administration viewpoint, appropriate arrangements and documentation have been put in place to 
support the Board over the last 12 months. These have assisted in making the Board more effective and will 
continue to evolve. 
However, in light of the complexities it faces, particularly in implementing the recommendations arising 
from previous reviews, and the relative complexities of the role of the APVMA itself, the Board is understaffed 
to enable it to succeed in its role. 
Some work has already been undertaken by the APVMA to identify potential legislative changes that may 
simplify the APVMA’s governance arrangements and set the Board up to succeed.  
From the document reviews and interviews conducted by Thoughtpost, there doesn’t appear to be any 
hurdle to setting the APVMA Board up with the powers to fulfil its duty as the Accountable Authority of the 
APVMA, as is the case in other federal regulatory authorities. 
As an initial step we recommend that the legislation be changed to allow an increase in the number of Board 
members from 5 (including the CEO) to a minimum of 7 (excluding the CEO). This will allow the Minister to 
recruit a broader range of skills and will also allow the delegation of Board matters to sub-committees, 
reducing the workload of the board meetings. 
Implementation of the recommendations in this report will substantially improve the functions and 
operations of the APVMA Board.

18 
ATTACHMENT A – LIST OF INTERVIEWEES 
The following people were interviewed during the course of this review: 
Steve Jefferies  
Then Acting Chair APVMA 
Andrew Heath 
Board Secretary APVMA 
Jeremy Burdon 
Board Member APVMA 
Maree Gooch 
Board Member APVMA 
Melissa McEwen 
Then Acting CEO APVMA 
Wayne Terpstra 
Deputy CEO APVMA 
Kilifoti Eteuati 
Executive General Counsel APVMA 
Adam Fennessy PSM 
Matt Lowe 
The Hon Murray Watt 
Then Minister Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry 
Michelle Healy 
Then Minister’s Chief of Staff, Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry 
Don Cross 
Chair, APVMA Audit and Risk Committee 
Glenys Beauchamp 
Chair, Food Standards Australia and New Zealand

19 
ATTACHMENT B – LIST OF REFERENCE MATERIALS 
The following previous reviews of the APVMA were referenced in relation to this review: 
Mary Brennan APVMA Culture Review Interim Report (Feb 2023) 
Clayton Utz Strategy Review Report (Jul 2023) 
Final Report of the Independent Review of the Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Regulatory System in 
Australia – Ken Matthews (2021) 
Final Report Future Structure and Governance Arrangements for the APVMA – Ken Matthews (2023) 
Board Performance Review and Improvement Plan – Julie Garland McLellan (2023) 
The following reference material was used in conducting this review: 
Auditor-General Report 37 – Reporting on Governing Boards of Commonwealth Entities and Companies 
2022 
Australian Stock Exchange (ASX) Corporate Governance Council – Corporate governance principles and 
recommendations 
Australian National Audit Office (ANAO) Corporate Planning and Performance Statements under the PGPA 
Act August 2018 
ANAO Corporate planning, performance statements and risk management under the PGPA Act, 
November 2017 
ANAO Board Governance May 2019 
Australian Institute of Company Directors (AICD) reference documents: 
Role of the Board 
Annual Board Calendar 
Board Committees 
Board Size 
Checklist for assessing Board composition 
Guidance for preparing a Board Skills Matrix 
Role of the Audit Committee 
Role of the Chief Executive Officer or Managing Director.