Find contact details for Australian national animal health reference laboratories:
Policy for reference laboratories
The role of Australian national reference laboratories is designed to harmonise with the World
Organisation for Animal Health (WOAH) definitions of a reference laboratory (with regional and
international responsibilities):
To function as a centre of expertise and to facilitate standardisation of techniques relevant to the
specified disease(s).
To store and distribute biological reference products and any other reagents used in the diagnosis
and control of the specified disease(s).
To develop new procedures for the diagnosis, control and exclusion testing of the specified
disease(s).
To gather, process, analyse and disseminate epidemiological data relevant to the specified
disease(s).
To participate in scientific and technical studies in collaboration with other laboratories or
organisations.
To publish and disseminate information on laboratory testing for the specified disease(s).
To provide scientific and technical training for laboratory personnel in other Australian
laboratories.
While not all reference laboratories may be able to provide all these functions, the list should act as a
guide as to the expectations of a national reference laboratory.
Criteria for endorsement as an Australian national reference laboratory
To carry out the role requirements as outlined above, an Australian national reference laboratory is
required to comply with these criteria:
Employ scientific staff recognised as experts in the specified disease(s) and have an available
range of diagnostic tests for the disease(s), including those not ordinarily available at other
Australian laboratories.
Where appropriate, be able to supply biological reference products and any other reagents used in
laboratory testing for the specified disease(s).
Conduct research to evaluate new laboratory tests for the specified disease(s) and encourage
collaborative studies with other laboratories.
Evaluate data submitted in support of the Animal Health Committee’s (AHC) approval of new
commercial test kits for existing laboratory tests, for the specified disease(s).
Gather, process, analyse and disseminate data relevant to the laboratory aspects of the specified
disease(s).
Assist the Australian National Quality Assurance Program (ANQAP) to conduct proficiency
testing where appropriate.
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
•

Access to reference laboratory services
Australian national reference laboratories will provide expertise and services to other Australian and
New Zealand laboratories on a cost-recovery basis deemed appropriate by that laboratory.
Reporting requirements
All Australian national reference laboratories will submit a brief annual report of activities to the AHC
through:
the Subcommittee on Animal Health Laboratory Standards (SCAHLS) (if an Australian Animal
Health Laboratory-based lab), or
Animal Health Australia (AHA) (if a state-based lab).
This will include confirmation of expertise, data on testing levels, a summary of research including
publications, and a record of training activities. The report will follow the same format as the annual
WOAH report. WOAH reference laboratories which also serve as national reference laboratories may
submit their annual WOAH report to the AHC through SCAHLS rather than prepare an additional
report.
In the event of a significant change in the ability of an Australian national reference laboratory to meet
its requirements (e.g. the loss of designated ‘expert’), the laboratory is required to advise the AHC
through SCAHLS or AHA, as appropriate, of its intentions to retain or relinquish national reference
laboratory status.
Our review process
The AHC will annually review the ability of each laboratory to meet the requirements of an Australian
national reference laboratory.
When an Australian national reference laboratory fails to meet the requirements or relinquishes its
reference laboratory status, the AHC, through SCAHLS or AHA, will require a statement justifying
retention of reference laboratory status, or invite new tenders as appropriate.
If new tenders are called, all relevant laboratories will be invited to make submissions. When there is
more than one submission for a given reference laboratory, the AHC, through SCAHLS or AHA, will
assess each of the submissions on their merit and vote accordingly. All aspects of this review will occur
‘in session’.
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/animal/health/laboratories/reference
• 
•