An import request is a proposal made to bring goods into Australia. Import requests are also referred to as ‘import proposals’ or ‘market access requests’.
Each year Australia receives a significant number of import requests for a variety of different commodities. To ensure we limit the risk of introducing pests and diseases into Australia, we must assess the biosecurity risk posed by each request.
The department’s available resources limit the number of import requests that can be progressed at any given time. To manage demand, import requests are added to our Import Market Access Request Register. We prioritise import requests by considering a range of principles including:
- National interest – whether it supports Australia to meet our international obligations and/or contributes to delivering on Australian government priorities.
- Strategic alignment – whether it helps achieve our departmental goals of a more sustainable, productive, internationally competitive and profitable agricultural, food and fibre industry, as well as safeguarding Australia’s animal and plant health status.
- Tangible benefits – whether it delivers benefits that add value to the Australian community.
- Challenges and barriers – whether there are challenges or barriers that could inhibit safe and viable trade and the likelihood of overcoming these barriers.
- Practical considerations – whether we have the resources and technical capacity to successfully negotiate the market access request.
Import requests that are not scheduled for assessment in the current annual workplan remain on the register for consideration in future planning cycles.
Most market access requests remain on the register for several years.
Who can provide an import request?
Import requests may be initiated by the government authority of another country, or by stakeholders within Australia, as detailed below.
Other countries
Import requests from other countries must be submitted to us by the relevant government authority of the country concerned.
Exporters wishing to submit an import request should contact their respective government authority, which will manage the request on their behalf.
Australian stakeholders
Import requests may also be initiated by stakeholders in Australia, including:
- people or organisations that want to import goods (plants, animals and other goods)
- Australian industries wanting access to new imported genetic materials or wanting to establish new protocols for products imported for processing.
Requirements for import requests
There is no standard form for an import request. However, the request must:
- be in writing
- include relevant scientific and other information to the extent that it is available
- include a range of details as set out in the tables below.
In some cases, applicants may be required to supply additional information about the good to be imported. We will not consider an import request until we have received all relevant and required information.
Plants or plant products
Requests to import plants or plant products into Australia require more specific information, including:
| 1. Description of proposed import |  | 
| 2. Production and cultivation |  | 
| 3. Pest management |  | 
| 4. Pest free areas |  | 
| 5. Post-harvest management |  | 
| 6. Phytosanitary inspection and certification |  | 
| 7. Existing export information for the country of origin |  | 
| 8. List of pests and diseases |  | 
| 9. References |  | 
If the required information is not available, we may require the exporting country to conduct special surveys and monitoring to inform our analysis. We will not conduct an import risk analysis without all relevant information.
Animals, animal products and genetic materials
The information required in response to a request to import an animal, animal product or genetic material into Australia will be tailored to the commodity and exporting country.
The information required will also differ for access requests for commodities for which Australia has existing import conditions.
It will be important to establish whether there is legislation, standards, infrastructure and other factors within the country that will provide a sufficient basis for the competent authority to certify against Australia’s import requirements.
Read more about how Australia evaluates the animal health status of countries, zones and compartments.
Download
Evaluation of animal health status of countries, zones and compartments for imports of animals and products of animal origin (PDF 177 KB)
Evaluation of animal health status of countries, zones and compartments for imports of animals and products of animal origin (DOCX 232 KB)
If you have difficulty accessing these files, visit web accessibility for assistance.