The Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry manages 10 quotas under the Australia-United Kingdom Free Trade Agreement (A-UK FTA), including sugar.
Australian exporters can export sugar at a 0% tariff rate under the following quota volumes.
| Year of agreement | Quantity (MT) | 
|---|---|
| 1 | 26,958.904 | 
| 2 | 100,000 | 
| 3 | 120,000 | 
| 4 | 140,000 | 
| 5 | 160,000 | 
| 6 | 180,000 | 
| 7 | 200,000 | 
| 8 | 220,000 | 
Access to the quotas will be administered via an allocation system until the available quota amount has been exhausted.
Exporters can use the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade tariff portal to find the current tariff rate applying to their product and to compare the tariff reduction received under the A-UK FTA.
Key dates to remember
- 1 July to 31 July – Notification of annual production data due
- 1 August to 31 August – Milling companies receive eligibility volume for next quota year and nominate marketers
- 30 September – Quota year finishes
- 1 October – Quota year commences
Current Quota usage
The quota usage tables show the total quantity of quota used by Australia for A-UK FTA products. The tables are updated regularly.
Apply for a quota certificate for sugar
Exporters will need to apply to export sugar to UK at the reduced tariff rate.
To apply for a quota certificate, an exporter must:
- complete and submit the A-UK FTA TRQ certificate application using the online submit button on the last page of the form.
Please note, you cannot apply for a quota certificate more than 3 weeks before your consignment is due to depart Australia.
A-UK FTA quota certificates cannot be amended without the corresponding export documentation being amended so if there is a change to the exporter, importer, product type or quantity of the shipment after the certificate has been issued the existing certificate may need to be cancelled and a replacement certificate issued. Contact Quota Admin if there is a change to any details on the certificate.
Note: Quota administration is cost recovered on a per certificate basis in accordance with the Export Charges (Imposition-General) Regulation 2021 and the Export Control (Fees and Payments) Rules 2021. Exporters are invoiced monthly for any quota certificates issued. The current cost recovered amount is $86 per certificate issued.
Issuing a quota certificate
Under the legislation the department is required to provide a paper-based certificate with an original government stamp and signature for all UK certificates. To comply with this process the department will issue a paper-based certificate and post to the exporter using the standard Australia Post method.
The department will provide the exporter with an electronic copy of the certificate and then post the original to the exporter as this will be required by UK Customs.
The department can send certificates to exporters using Express Post through Australia Post if the exporter provides the department with self-addressed envelopes. If an urgent certificate is required to be sent directly overseas this can be done if the exporter provides the department with courier satchels and account details.
If a certificate is required urgently, email the Quota Unit with the RFP/REX number of the consignment that requires a manual certificate. The email must be received by the Quota Unit no later than 10.00am (Canberra time) for same-day processing.
Read the detail
Legislation
The Export Control (Tariff Rate Quotas—General) Rules 2021 governs the rules around quotas for sugar to UK.
Data collection
We report on export quotas using data submitted for certificate applications.
Contact us
Phone: 02 6272 4068
Email: quota.admin@aff.gov.au