| refer to the Consultation Document on the Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals Legislation Amendment
note the purpose of this proposal is to reduce uncertainty for APVMA staff and to allow
APVMA is concerned that citing formulation and other details for a currently registered
product and confirming those are similar or closely similar could result in the disclosure of
The need to clarify CCI provisions would be removed if the reforms allowed a more flexible
definition of similar and closely similar so that the applicant for registration of a product
claimed to be similar or closely similar could provide risk based information. Provisions
similar to the interchangeable ingredients provision of the Agricultural and Veterinary
Chemicals Code Regulations 1995 would reduce if not eliminate the need for indirect
«| suggest that similar criteria could be applied to define when formulations are
similar and closely similar so that precise details do not need to be ‘disclosed' by
APVMA when APVMA determines a formulation is similar or closely similar to that of
a registered product. The decision on the similarity would be based on matters such
as whether the signal words as required by the Poisons Standard were different or
proposed product so that APVMA could conclude those criteria are not different to
Using such criteria would allow APVMA to confirm thecriteria are satisfied without the
need for the formulation details to be the same. This would overcome the need for APVMA
to potentially disclose details of the reference product formulation by accepting the
Proposal 3 - Increase the APVMA’s flexibility to manage minor errors in applications at preliminary
However, the short timeframe is a concern if a critical person in a company is away during
the period when a response is required. This is a particular problem in smaller companies.

The systems need to allow easy transfer or delegation of projects to others within
Proposal 4 - APVMA amendment of the relevant particulars or conditions in a variation application.
Proposal 5 - Timeframe for notifying Food Standards Australia New Zealand (FSANZ) about
(note the purpose is to add the potential for human exposure to antimicrobial resistant
microorganisms as a safety consideration. No limitations are discussed in the proposal on
whether all products or types of products would need to address potential resistance of
microorganisms of concern to human health or if only specific types of products would need
The underlying purpose is worthwhile but the implementation of the proposal needs to be
The requirement should apply only to those products that are known to have potential to
The requirement should not be imposed such that applicants are required to assess
potential for human exposure to antimicrobial! resistant microorganisms for substances that
are not of concern. As an example applicants for registration of insecticides should not be
required to confirm the products have no potential to induce antimicrobial resistance
unless there is a reason to suspect this might be relevant to a specific product or group of
Applicants should not be prevented from registering products that might have potential for
antimicrobial resistance if those same or similar products are available for other uses not
regulated by APVMA, e.g. registration of a dairy sanitiser should not be prevented because
it might select for tolerant microorganisms of concern to humansif that same or a similar
products are widely used in food processing plants and/or in medical facilities. A risk based
Proposal 9 - Including civil penalty provisions for false or misleading information.
Proposal 10 - Minor technical amendments to the Administration Act and Agvet Code.