In the preceding years prior to the introduction of Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals Code Act 
1994, clearance certificates were given by various national technical committees. The certificates 
were then used by the state registration agencies as a basis for approving the registration in each 
As part of that system, provisional clearance certificates were issued whilst the various technical 
committees obtained more data from the registrant. This is analogous to the current proposal 
whereby registration of a product can occur whilst further efficacy data are generated by the 
In 1994, chlorfluazuron residues were detected in Australian beef and forced considerable loss of 
market access for Australian Beef producers. The chlorfluazuron product ‘Helix Insecticide’ 
McMullin & Anor v ICI Australia Operations Pty Ltd and Ors ("the Helix decision") is an important 
case study in how provisional registration type programs can lead to inadequate consideration of 
risks. Whilst the proposed scheme is solely about efficacy, the case study shows how information in 
one kind of risk assessment can provide important information about other types of risks.  
The issue in question in the Helix case was what was known about the product’s bioaccumulation in 
animal tissues. The environmental technical committee was concerned about bioaccumulation and 
the effect of the product on aquatic organisms. However, the overarching clearance certificate 
committee was did not translate those concerns to potential issues for residues in livestock.  
The conclusion drawn is that provisional registration systems have the potential for adverse 
consequences due to a lack of a coherent overarching picture of risks from conducting all the 
Chemical products are not used to minimise risk, they are used to control pest and disease etc. 
Therefore, efficacy is the fundamental basis for the registration of a chemical product because it 
supports the product’s purpose. The other forms of risk assessment are conducted to manage the 
risks to acceptable levels whilst the product achieves its primary purpose.  Accordingly, the As Low 
As Reasonably Achievable (ALARA) principle requires that a registrant demonstrate that the use 
The consequence of not following the ALARA principle is that product rates can be higher than 
necessary which results in higher residues for each use. For products with high chronic toxicity and 
many uses on the labels this can mean that the Acceptable Daily intake is exceeded preventing 

The proposal assumes that the use pattern will be supported by International data at the time of 
registration. This is only true when the pests or disease is the same in Australia as overseas and 
there are no other geographic or cultural differences that influence the pest or disease 
management.  From an examination of Joint Meeting on Pesticide Residue (JMPR) data on use 
patterns, it can be seen that Australian use patterns are generally different to those overseas.  
Typically, trials are conducted in a manner to optimise the data collection to fulfil as many data 
requirements as possible. This means that when a chemical product is applied to an animal or crop 
in a trial situation, data are often collected for not just efficacy but for crop or animal safety and 
residues as well. The proposal is going to be of questionable value if the registrant’s are required to 
Proposal 3 –Prescribed approvals and registrations (approval and registration for 
This new process would only apply for those active constituents, chemical products and labels where 
minimal or no assessment of technical information is required. It is unclear how active constituents 
could be approved without a technical assessment as the route of manufacture and starting 
materials dictate the relevant impurities. Assessors need to predict the relevant impurities and 
ensure that the batch testing provides adequate information to determine if active constituent 
Proposal 4 – Data protection incentives for certain uses of chemical products (limits 
it is unlikely to apply to the vast majority of products because data protection periods are only 
It is questioned whether the proposal could be manipulated by a registrant to apply for one crop 
(such as apples) and then at the end of the protection period apply for pome fruit by submission of 
pear data thereby getting 4 years of data protection even though they may have had the data all 
along. Does the system adequately encourage registrants to apply for crop groups at the original 
Proposal 9 – Standards for registered chemical product constituents (definition of 
It is unclear if the proposal includes that active constituents can have their concentration varied. It is 
recommended that the proposal solely relate to non active constituents as there a range of 
There is nothing inherently unreasonable about changes in formulants. Concentration ranges should 
take into account both formulation manufacturing and analytical uncertainties. It would seem 
reasonable to set concentration ranges as defaults based on their concentration (as occurs with 
active constituents).However, the intentional manipulation of a formulation beyond the 
uncertainties mentioned should dictate the consideration of the physical characteristics and 
potentially the stability of active constituent. It is recommended that if there is any intentional

change in a formulation that the physical properties and relevant impurities of the formulation