The department considers cruise vessels to be a high biosecurity risk due to a number of factors, including:
- the large number of crew and passengers on board increases the risk of spreading human diseases of biosecurity concern
- passengers disembarking with souvenirs from overseas countries which may contain wood, sand/soil, seeds, grass/straw or other plant material, all of which are subject to biosecurity control
- the large amount of food items and stores carried on board
- the amount of waste to be managed
- live plants on board.
Operators of cruise vessels must comply with requirements administered by the department to protect against these risks.
For traveller information please visit the advice to travellers page - Travelling to Australia.
For information regarding release from biosecurity control (previously known as ‘coastal strip’) please refer to Release from biosecurity control webpage.
The Maritime Traveller Processing Committee (MTPC) co-ordinates the exercise of various statutory controls and responsibilities carried out at seaports. One of the MTPC’s functions is to review approval requests from the cruise ship industry to arrive at determined first points of entry or Non-first points of entry where they may not have appropriate infrastructure or processes in place to manage biosecurity risk.
Cruise industry agents may submit proposed itineraries up to three years in advance for the next cruise season. Reporting must be submitted to the Maritime Travellers Processing Committee (MTPC) for approval by the Australian Government agencies concerned. See the MTPC details on the web.
International vessels must comply with the permissions and conditions contained in the relevant FPOE determinations. Each determination lists:
- permissions for particular classes of vessel that may berth, or goods that may be unloaded at the port
- biosecurity entry points (BEPs) within the port
- any conditions associated with the port as a first point of entry.
Read more about FPOE Determinations.
BEPs are designated areas within the port where specific classes of vessels must arrive or goods must be unloaded. This is so their biosecurity risks can be appropriately managed. Different classes of vessels and goods require different infrastructure and procedures to manage the risks associated with their arrival.
If a BEP has been designated in a first point of entry determination for a specific class of vessel or goods, then all vessels or goods that are part of that class must be brought to a BEP as soon as practicable when arriving into the port.
Ports that do not have a determination under section 229 of the Biosecurity Act are classed as non-first points of entry. These ports have not been assessed against the FPoE Biosecurity Standards and may not have appropriate infrastructure or processes in place to manage biosecurity risks.
To arrive at one of these ports, you will need to apply and get permission to moor your vessel or unload goods at a non-first point of entry using the Maritime and Aircraft Reporting System (MARS). Note: You will also have to apply to moor or unload goods at an FPOE that is not determined for that particular class of vessel or goods.
How cruise vessels can request permission to moor/unload cargo (passenger baggage) at a non-first point of entry
For vessels to berth and/or unload cargo at a non-first point of entry, submit an application and receive written authorisation. Be aware when submitting a request that:
- Applications are evaluated on a case-by-case basis and approval is not guaranteed.
- Applications must be submitted at least 10 days before arrival to allow for proper evaluation and procedural fairness.
- Applications will be denied:
  - where they are received less than 10 days or where additional information is requested and not provided.
  - where there is insufficient reason or circumstance for arrival.
  - if the biosecurity risk cannot be appropriately managed.
It is preferable to consult with the department early in the planning process to minimise impacts to itinerary plans or refusal of applications.
Submit non-first point of entry requests to nonfirstpoint@aff.gov.au
Cruise vessels are subject to the negative pratique process and will not be granted pratique until a biosecurity officer has assessed the human health risks associated with the vessel at its first port of entry. For cruise vessels, the submission of a Pre-Arrival Report (PAR) is required 96-12 hours before the estimated arrival at an Australian port.
Assessment by a biosecurity officer should occur at a declared first point of entry that is the vessel’s first port of arrival into Australia.
For further information on vessel pratique refer to: Vessel Pratique
Under the Biosecurity Act 2015, cruise vessels wishing to enter a port that is non first point of entry must apply for and be granted permission by the department, prior to arrival at the port.
In addition to the above requirements, cruise vessels must also submit the following documents to the department prior to arrival:
- Pre-Arrival Report (PAR) - Cruise vessels entering the Australian territory are required to submit this form within 96 to 12 hours of their estimated time of arrival (ETA) at the first point of entry.
- Ballast Water Report (BWR) – A Ballast Water Report must be submitted before or with the PAR.
The master must complete this form to report to the department any change to the information originally reported on the PAR, prior to the vessel entering the next Australian port of call.
- Vessel masters must advise the department of changes to previously reported information (incorrect or inaccurate) about crew/passenger movements, human health and waste disposal. Only the relevant section of this form should be completed to report the changes.
- This form must be submitted to the National Maritime Centre (NMC) 96 to 12 hours prior to the vessel’s arrival at the next Australian port.
- Where illness or death on board the vessel is reported, the vessel master will be required to answer additional questions to assess the public health risk associated with the vessel prior to arrival at the port.
- Live plants conveyance log – cruise vessels are required to provide the department with a list of all live plants on board the vessel.
- Cruise Vessels may be eligible to recycle certain waste materials if they follow the department’s on-board cleaning and segregation requirements.
Crew and passengers going ashore for sight-seeing only and returning to the vessel the same day are ‘day trippers’ and are subject to inspection by department biosecurity officers. Day trippers are not permitted to take biosecurity risk material off the vessel.
Biosecurity risk material is any good that poses a risk of introducing any exotic weed, pest or disease into Australia. Biosecurity risk material includes goods with feathers, seeds and other material of animal and/or plant origin, including souvenirs.
Crew and passengers should ensure that no food items including fruit, meats and dairy products or prepared meals are taken off the vessel.
All bags and goods are subject to biosecurity control and may be inspected by biosecurity officers. If there is an unacceptable biosecurity risk present, a biosecurity officer may direct you to treat the goods (at your own cost) following which the goods will be returned to you. Goods that cannot be treated will be forfeited to the Commonwealth and destroyed.
The department has produced a short announcement specifically for shore excursion passengers. The shore excursion announcement is to be played as:
- the sole announcement where there are no disembarking passengers (i.e. only day trippers)
- following the disembarking passenger announcement, where there are both disembarking passengers and shore excursion day-trippers.
For more information visit Travelling or sending goods to Australia.
The person in charge or the operator of an incoming vessel, or aircraft, that is subject to biosecurity control because of subsection 191(2) or (4), must ensure that each person (including a member of the crew) on board the aircraft or vessel is given information about biosecurity requirements under the laws of the Australian Commonwealth.
The content and form of information given under subsection (1) must have been approved by the Director of Biosecurity or the Director of Human Biosecurity. The information may be given in writing or orally, including by means of an audio, or audio‑visual, recording.
The following caution applies to the person in charge or the operator of an incoming aircraft or vessel that is subject to biosecurity control because of s191(2) or (4), in accordance with s220 of the Biosecurity Act.
‘You may be liable to a civil penalty if you fail to ensure that each person (including a member of the crew) on board the aircraft/vessel is given approved information about biosecurity requirements under the laws of the Commonwealth’.
Either the passenger announcement or shore excursion announcement must be aired on all international cruise ships prior to arrival in Australia. The biosecurity passenger announcement is as follows and must not be edited.
Important passenger announcement
This is an important message from the Australian Government. Australia has strict biosecurity laws that apply to you. We need your help to protect Australia’s environment, unique wildlife, farming and way of life from dangerous pests and diseases.
That’s why you must always declare or dispose of food and ingredients, such as fruit, vegetables, spices, grains, meat, eggs and dairy as well as plants, flowers or seeds and wood and animal products, such as fur or shells.
You must also declare any shoes or equipment with soil on them, or that have been used in rivers and lakes, or if you have been to a farm or in contact with farm animals in the past 30 days.
Remember, all food you are served on-board must be left on-board. Do not take it with you when you leave.
When you arrive, a biosecurity officer will check your incoming passenger declaration, and your bags may be screened and inspected. You are responsible for all items in your luggage.
If you don’t declare truthfully, it may result in a penalty. Your visa may be cancelled and you may be refused entry into Australia. You might also be prosecuted in court.
If you are unsure, just declare it.
You will not be penalised if you declare and present all goods, even if they are not allowed into Australia.
We also need to keep people safe from communicable diseases. If you feel sick, and have a fever, cough, sore throat, or are having difficulty breathing, please tell a crew member now. This will protect you, your family and other members of the community.
Make your arrival into Australia as easy as possible. Just declare it.
Translation Services - Phone (in Australia): 131 450
The department provides transcripts and recordings of announcements to passengers, for use by cruise vessel operators. Translated versions are also available for people from non-English speaking backgrounds. This information includes awareness material.
English
Download
Passenger video - English 2023 (16:9 1920x1080 304 MB)
Passenger announcement - English 2021 (PDF 630 KB)
Passenger announcement - English 2021 (MP3 4.1 MB)
Passenger announcement - English 2021 (WAV 19.2 MB)
Shore Excursion Announcement - English 2011 (PDF 211 KB)
Shore Excursion Announcement - English 2011 (MP3 396 KB)
Shore Excursion Announcement - English 2011 (WAV 2.8 MB)
If you have difficulty accessing these files, visit web accessibility for assistance.
Chinese
Download
Chinese simplified
Shore Excursion Announcement - Chinese Simplified 2015 (PDF 419 KB)
Shore Excursion Announcement - Mandarin 2015 (MP3 1.6 MB)
Chinese traditional
Passenger announcement - Chinese Traditional 2015 (PDF 308 KB)
Shore Excursion Announcement - Chinese Traditional 2015 (PDF 428 KB)
If you have difficulty accessing these files, visit web accessibility for assistance.
Japanese
Download
Shore Excursion Announcement - Japanese 2015 (PDF 417 KB)
Shore Excursion Announcement - Japanese 2015 (MP3 1.7 MB)
If you have difficulty accessing these files, visit web accessibility for assistance.
Malay
Download
- Shore Excursion Announcement - Malay 2015 (PDF 373 KB)
- Shore Excursion Announcement - Malay 2015 (MP3 1.3 MB)
If you have difficulty accessing these files, visit web accessibility for assistance.
Factsheets and Biosecurity messaging
Biosecurity cruise crew
Download
Biosecurity cruise crew – English (PDF 771 KB) 
Biosecurity cruise crew – Hindi (PDF 1.36 MB)
Biosecurity cruise crew – Indonesian (PDF 1 MB) 
Biosecurity cruise crew – Tagalog (PDF 1 MB)
On board biosecurity messaging
Download
Digital Signage
Download
If you have difficulty accessing these files, visit web accessibility for assistance.