Biosecurity is a shared responsibility. We all have a part to play to protect Australia’s economy, environment, industries and communities from biosecurity threats.
Our actions can create or mitigate risks. From travelling and ordering goods from overseas, to identifying and reporting exotic pests and diseases within Australia, this all impacts our biosecurity system.
Biosecurity protects our home and our way of life.
Explore public education resources
Play a role in recognising those who help uphold Australia’s biosecurity integrity.
Biosecurity is how we protect our plants, animals, food and nature.
Our information campaigns
Online shopping and biosecurity campaign
8 April 2024 - 22 June 2024
An Online shopping campaign was undertaken to increase awareness and promote compliance with Australia’s biosecurity laws by educating online shoppers about the measures they need to take while shopping online for products from overseas, and the consequences of non-compliance. The campaign was delivered using digital display, social media and Google search channels.
International travellers and biosecurity campaign
26 November 2023 - 3 February 2024
An International travellers and biosecurity campaign was undertaken to drive awareness of Australia’s biosecurity conditions, promote compliance and educate travellers arriving in Australia over the peak Christmas travelling period. The campaign was delivered using digital display and social media channels.
Foot-and-mouth disease campaign
16 October 2022 - 31 January 2023
A Foot-and-mouth disease (FMD) communications campaign was undertaken to increase awareness among the Australian community and international travellers about the risks of FMD and what they need to do to be compliant with Australia’s biosecurity requirements.
Please see the Accountable Authority (Chief Executive) Certification for Government Advertising campaign to demonstrate the that the campaign complied with the Interim Guidelines on Information and Advertising Campaigns June 2022 (Guidelines).