You can apply for an exemption from one or more provisions of the legislation in relation to relevant goods.
This includes the ability to apply for an exemption from an approved arrangement to export livestock.
Our exemptions policy
Our live animal export exemptions policy includes information on:
- available exemptions
- who may apply
- how to apply
Exemptions for small and infrequent exporters
Some exporters only export small numbers of animals or consignments per year. In these cases, we may consider an approved arrangement unnecessary. An exemption for a small and infrequent exporter may be an option.
To be eligible for this exemption, there is a limit on how many livestock and consignments you can export. You must export no more than 400 livestock in no more than 4 consignments during a calendar year.
We may grant exemptions for up to 5 years. After this, you must reapply.
Other exemptions
For all live animal export exemptions other than for small and infrequent exporters, use the Application for an exemption in relation to exporting livestock, live animals other than livestock, and animal reproductive material form.
Check your export licence
You must have or have applied for an export licence before you can apply for an exemption.
If you are applying for an export licence
If you are a new exporter, you may make an application online via the Export Service to apply for an export licence and an exemption at the same time.
You must develop and submit an operations and governance manual. Information on developing this manual can be found in the guideline below.
If you can’t access the Export Service or would prefer to use the application form, you can contact us via email livestockexp@aff.gov.au to request the exemption form.
If you already have an export licence
You may apply to vary your export licence to apply for an exemption via the Export Service. If you currently hold an approved arrangement for export, this will need to be revoked if your application for an exemption is approved.
If you can’t access the Export Service or would prefer to use the application form, you can contact us via email livestockexp@aff.gov.au to request the exemption form.
Download the guidelines
- Guidelines for an operations and governance manual (PDF 268 KB)
- Guidelines for an operations and governance manual( DOCX 234 KB)
If you have difficulty accessing these files, visit web accessibility for assistance.
Complete the application form
Complete an application via the Export Service.
Submit your application
Submit your application online, including your operations and governance manual, via the Export Service or email your PDF application form and a copy of your operations and governance manual to livestockexp@aff.gov.au.
We charge a fee to assess your application. See our charging guidelines.
Assessment and outcome
We will contact you if we require further information for your application.
We will notify you in writing of the application outcome.
Check your approvals
Once approved, you can begin the process of exporting under your exemption.
Ensure you have all the required approvals in place to export livestock.
The export process
You must submit extra documentation with your notice of intention to export.
You must include a consignment risk management plan that sets out how you will meet:
- importing country requirements
- ASEL requirements, including management plans for exporting certain types of livestock.
See the approved arrangement guidelines appendices for guidance on management plans.
Export your livestock
You can now export your livestock consignment under your exemption.
To maintain your exemption, you must reapply for your exemption before it expires. The process is the same. There is an application fee. See our charging guidelines.
Operate under your manual
If we approve you to hold a small and infrequent exemption you must operate under your operations and governance manual.