[expand all]
What is the ‘Independent Employer of AAOs Accreditation Scheme’?
It is a scheme developed by the Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment to provide for
the employment of Australian Government Authorised Officers (AAOs) by independent employment
providers. Under the Scheme, agencies will supply AAOs to Australian export slaughter establishments
to meet EU standards.
Why is the Department of Agriculture running the Scheme?
Many countries accept product prepared to the Australian Standards, however where there are
additional requirements, the department will develop programs to facilitate trade to those markets.
The European Union requires that post-mortem inspections are performed by inspectors employed by a
party other than the food business operation. Therefore to export product to that market, AAOs must be
sourced from an Independent Employer.
Who can employ an AAO?
AAOs can be employed by an export registered abattoir or labour hire provider (e.g. independent AAO
employer).
For the EU market, AAOs must be employed by an independent AAO employer approved by the
department to supply AAOs.
How can you become an Independent employer of AAOs?
Approval is granted when the applicant’s company has been accredited against all the criteria.
Companies must also be able to maintain this accreditation.
Can AAOs sourced from an Independent AAO Employer perform other tasks
on the establishment?
An abattoir can use relief AAOs hired by the Independent AAO Employer to conduct other activities
provided:
the AAO is not nominated in a position of management and control of the establishment; and
the primary function of the AAO is to perform meat inspection activities
Where can I find information about the Scheme?
Information on the application process for AAOs, including the application form and the Independent
Employer of AAOs Accreditation Scheme is available on the department’s website.
• 
•

Participation
To participate in this initiative visit the Independent Employer of AAOs Accreditation Scheme on the
department’s website and download the Scheme information.
Departmental Contacts: AAO Coordinator, Meat Export Branch.
Email: aao@awe.gov.au
Telephone: 02 6272 3933
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/export/controlled-goods/meat/elmer-3/independent-employer-of-
aaos-accreditation-scheme/independent-aao-employers-fact-sheet