European Union Cattle Accreditation Scheme (EUCAS) accredited properties are prohibited from using
products containing oestradiol 17β or its ester-like derivatives on their EUCAS properties. To ensure
ongoing compliance with this requirement, the European Union Vendor Declaration (EUVD) has been
amended to include a declaration on the treatment history of the European Union (EU) eligible cattle.
The following documents relate to implementation of the new EUVD version 0720 and information on
oestradiol, including the handling of treated cattle:
[expand all]
EAN20-02 Amendments to the European Union Vendor Declaration and
supplementary declaration
This EUCAS advice notice outlines the changes to the European Union Vendor Declaration (EUVD)
including the timeframe for implementation and a copy of the supplementary declaration for use with
the EUVD version 0720:
Download
Document
Pages File size
EAN20-02 Amendments to the European Union Vendor Declaration PDF
4
549 KB
Supplementary Declaration PDF
1
251 KB
If you have difficulty accessing these files, please visit web accessibility.
Infographic and decision trees for buying and selling cattle using the new
EUVD version 0720
This infographic provides an overview of the implementation of the new EUVD version 0720 and two
decision trees to assist EUCAS accredited managers when buying and selling cattle:
Download
Document
Pages File size
Infographic on implementation of EUVD version 0720 PDF
2
943 KB
Decision tree for buying and selling cattle using the new EUVD version 0720 PDF
2
483 KB
If you have difficulty accessing these files, please visit web accessibility.

Handling of oestradiol treated cattle
If any cattle on a EUCAS property have been treated with oestradiol they will no longer be eligible for
the European Union export meat and meat product supply chain. Please refer to EAN20-02 above for
further information.
A list of EU-eligible cattle treated with any oestradiol product remaining on the property must be
provided to the department. The department will change the status of these animals to Non-EU
approved breeders on the National Livestock Identification System (NLIS) database. These cattle can
remain on the EUCAS property as Non-EU approved breeders but will not be eligible for the EU export
meat market, however their progeny will be EU-eligible.
The EUCAS team can be contact by emailing eucas@awe.gov.au or by calling 1800 305 544.
Frequently Asked Questions - FAQs
The following document provides a list of frequently asked questions that may assist in providing
additional information to the above:
Download
Document
Pages File size
Frequently Asked Questions PDF
6
335 KB
Frequently Asked Questions DOCX
6
65 KB
If you have difficulty accessing these files, please visit web accessibility.
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/export/controlled-goods/meat/elmer-3/eucas/new-euvd-720-
implementation