Biosecurity roundtables are hosted by state and territory governments on behalf of the National Biosecurity Committee. These focus on themes selected by the Committee and help inform topics for the National Biosecurity Forum.
Purpose and scope
The roundtables are an opportunity for participants to discuss biosecurity issues with government, industry, producers, environmental and community groups.
Participants use the roundtables to:
- build relationships
- demonstrate a commitment to open and honest engagement
- educate and inform others about current and future biosecurity challenges
- network and explore ideas about the future direction of biosecurity
- discuss governments’ biosecurity commitments and activities
- discuss issues specific to stakeholder groups.
For more information on these roundtables, please contact the Biosecurity Roundtable Secretariat.
Archived reports
Download summary reports from each state and territory biosecurity roundtable. These are circulated after each event.
If you have difficulty accessing these files, visit web accessibility for assistance.
Personal information means any information or opinion about an identified, or reasonably identifiable, individual.
Sensitive information is a subset of personal information and includes any information or opinion about an individual’s racial or ethnic origin, political opinion or association, religious beliefs or affiliations, philosophical beliefs, sexual preferences or practices, trade or professional associations and memberships, union membership, criminal record, health or genetic information and biometric information or templates.
The Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment collects your personal information (as defined by the Privacy Act 1988) in this form for the purposes of registering you for this Biosecurity Roundtable Program event. If the relevant personal information requested in this consent form is not provided by you, the department will be unable to register you for the event.
The department may also collect your personal information at the event. The department may take photographs, videos and audio recordings for the purpose of promoting biosecurity events organised by the department (including NBC Jurisdictional Roundtables, Environmental Biosecurity Roundtables and the National Biosecurity Forum).
Personal information may be disclosed to persons or organisations where necessary for these purposes, provided the disclosure is consistent with the Privacy Act. Your personal information will be used and stored in accordance with the Australian Privacy Principles.
The department may publish photographs, video and audio content from the event on its website or social media accounts. The website and social media accounts are accessible to members of the public in Australia and overseas. If your photograph is published on the department’s website or social media accounts, it is likely to be disclosed to overseas recipients accessing the website or social media accounts.
By completing and submitting this form and attending the event, you consent to the collection, use and disclosure of all personal information (including sensitive information) as set out in this notice.
See the department’s Privacy Policy to learn more about accessing or correcting personal information or making a complaint. Alternatively, contact us.
Other engagement platforms
We also engage with stakeholders through the Australian biosecurity webinar series and the Detect and Protect podcast.
The webinar series covers a range of biosecurity topics, such as Australia’s priority biosecurity risks and how they are being managed, preparedness and response activities, innovation, and collaboration, as well as priorities and challenges for biosecurity.
Detect and Protect provides an opportunity to get engaged and informed on the different aspects of Australia’s biosecurity system.