Publication details
The National Environment and Community Biosecurity Research, Development and Extension Strategy (NECBRDES) 2021-26 provides a framework and actions to develop a national coordinated and strategic approach to biosecurity research, development, and extension (RD&E) for Australia’s environment and community.
The Strategy was developed by the Centre for Invasive Species Solutions on behalf of the Environment and Invasives Committee. Stakeholders from diverse backgrounds were involved in its co-design and included a national steering committee, a technical expert panel and the Chief Environmental Biosecurity Officer. During consultation on the draft strategy between June and July 2021, fourteen submissions were received and considered in developing the final.
The purpose of NECBRDES 2021-26 is to coordinate actions that support and promote collaboration across government, research institutions, industry, and the community. Identify and promote biosecurity RD&E priorities for investment and to assist in the application of RD&E solutions to address biosecurity threats to our natural environment and social amenity. Targeted RD&E delivers greater protection of the natural environment and social amenity from biosecurity threats. The Strategy encompasses all aquatic (marine and freshwater) and terrestrial pests that negatively affect the environment, social amenities, infrastructures, transport, utilities and/or human lifestyles and wellbeing. It will complement existing national biosecurity RD&E strategies such as: Plant Biosecurity Research Initiative Strategy, National Animal Biosecurity RD&E Strategy and National Priorities for Introduced Marine Pest Research and Development.
Implementation of the strategy will focus on five focus areas of priority RD&E.
- Risk analysis and decision making
- Detection, diagnosis and surveillance
- Management methods and strategies
- Stakeholder engagement
- Governance, institutions and architecture
Download
| Document | Pages | File size | 
|---|---|---|
| National Environment and Community Research, Development and Extension Strategy PDF | 24 | 2,647 KB | 
| National Environment and Community Research, Development and Extension Strategy DOCX | 30 | 75 KB | 
If you have difficulty accessing these files, visit web accessibility for assistance.
Contact
For information contact the Environmental Biosecurity Office.