We have completed our review of import conditions for whole egg, egg yolk, egg white powder from approved countries.
Steps to complete this risk analysis
When we do a risk analysis, we:
- start the risk analysis by reviewing the science on pests and diseases of concern
- assess and analyse biosecurity risks
- develop proposed risk management measures
- consult the public on the draft report and then review comments
- publish a final report
- develop import conditions
- publish import conditions in our Biosecurity Import Conditions System (BICON)
Register in BICON to receive an alert when we publish the import conditions.
Learn more about why we carry out risk analyses and our international obligations.
About the final report
The review found that the likelihood of viable virus being present in egg powders is lower than previously assessed, and that thermal treatment requirements for egg powders could be reduced while still providing sufficient biosecurity risk management to meet Australia’s ALOP.
This review recommends the existing import conditions continue to be accepted and the following new heat treatment requirements be added as alternative options:
Whole egg and egg yolk powder conditions:
Require heat treatment of the product by pasteurisation of liquid whole egg and egg yolk for a minimum of 65°C for 6 minutes.
 
Egg white powder conditions:
Require heat treatment of the product after spray-drying by ‘hot-boxing’ for a minimum of 65°C for 5 days.
Final report
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, November 2023
Download
Australian import conditions for whole egg, egg yolk, egg white powder from approved countries – final report (PDF - 543 KB)
Australian import conditions for whole egg, egg yolk, egg white powder from approved countries – final report (DOCX - 955 KB)
If you have difficulty accessing these files, visit web accessibility for assistance.
CSIRO report
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation, June 2021
Download
The likelihood of avian influenza and avian orthoavulavirus-1 being present in eggs that are made into egg powder – CSIRO report, Scott 2021 (PDF - 1.3 MB)
The likelihood of avian influenza and avian orthoavulavirus-1 being present in eggs that are made into egg powder – CSIRO report, Scott 2021 (DOCX - 5.2 MB)
If you have difficulty accessing these files, visit web accessibility for assistance.
Register as a stakeholder
Register as a stakeholder to receive notices about animal biosecurity policy.
Contact us
For more information about this review email Animal Biosecurity.
Learn
Learn more about why we carry out risk analyses and our international obligations.