In response to an industry request, we are evaluating the animal biosecurity risks of importing natural casings from ovines, caprines, bovines, and porcines from all countries. For the purposes of this evaluation, natural casings are defined as intestines that have been cleaned, processed by scraping, defatting and washing, and preserved using salt or brine.
On 9 July 2026, we published a notice of intention to conduct this evaluation as a Biosecurity Import Risk Analysis (BIRA). A BIRA is conducted under the Biosecurity Act 2015 and the Biosecurity Regulation 2016. Publishing the notice of intention begins the 30-month timeframe for the BIRA, although the timeframe may be paused in certain circumstances.
We also published an issues paper for a feedback period which closed on 10 August 2026.
We are now considering all comments received. Your feedback is helping to inform our draft report. The draft report will be published for comment on our Have Your Say page.
Steps to complete this BIRA
When we do conduct a BIRA, we:
- publish a notice of intention to conduct a BIRA
- publish an issues paper
- publish a draft report and undertake public consultation
- consider all feedback received and may seek advice from the Scientific Advisory Group (SAG) before publishing a provisional report
- allow stakeholders to request the Inspector-General of Biosecurity (IGB) to review the process for conducting the BIRA.
- publish the final report
- develop import conditions
publish import conditions in our Biosecurity Import Conditions system (BICON).
About the BIRA
The BIRA will evaluate the biosecurity risks of importing natural casings produced using standard commercial processes. It will consider scientific evidence, supply chains, manufacturing processes and international standards. If the risks are too high, measures will be recommended to reduce them to an acceptable level.
Our evaluation will be a rigorous, technical, science-based process. We will follow the requirements of the Biosecurity Act 2015 and international standards.
We remain committed to upholding Australia’s biosecurity status. This includes protecting domestic industries from pest and disease threats.
We previously consulted stakeholders on the importation of natural casings between 26 November 2024 and 14 March 2025. Submissions received during that consultation will also be considered as part of this BIRA process.
Learn more about why we carry out risk analyses and our international obligations.
Notice of intention to conduct a BIRA
On 9 July 2026, we published this notice of intention. It advises that we are conducting a BIRA for the importation of natural casings for human consumption from all countries.
Issues paper
We released an issues paper for public consultation which closed on 10 August 2026.The issues paper provided the first opportunity for stakeholders to comment on the technical aspects of this BIRA.
This issues paper contains the following sections:
- an overview of Australia’s biosecurity policy framework
- background information on the production, processing and trade of natural casings
- an overview of how potential biosecurity hazards were identified and the results of the initial assessment.
Next steps
Submissions received during the public consultation for the BIRA issues paper will be considered when preparing the draft report. The draft report will contain proposed risk management measures and will be published for comment on our Have Your Say page.
Learn more about why we carry out risk analyses and our international obligations.
Previous public consultation
On 26 November 2024, we released the first issues paper for the importation of natural casings for human consumption. Public submissions for this issues paper closed on 14 March 2025, after a 105-day consultation period on our Have Your Say website.
Submissions received during this previous public consultation will be considered as part of the current BIRA process.
Watch webinar
As part of the previous public consultation, we hosted a webinar on 12 February 2025 and invited interested stakeholders to attend and submit questions. A recording of the webinar is available below, together with a transcript of the presentation and question and answer session.
Webinar transcript
- The import risk review for natural casings – issues paper: Webinar transcript (PDF 178 KB)
- The import risk review for natural casings – issues paper: Webinar transcript (Word 261 MB)
If you have difficulty accessing these files, visit web accessibility for assistance.
Contact us
For more information about this review email Animal Biosecurity.