All international aircraft arriving in Australian territory must land at a landing place that has been determined a first point of entry (FPOE) under section 223 of the Biosecurity Act 2015, unless we grant permission to land at a non-first point of entry (under subsection 239(2) of the Act).
This ensures that aircraft enter Australia at a location that has appropriate facilities and personnel to manage the biosecurity risks to an acceptable level.
Every international aircraft is legally required to provide a pre-arrival report (s193 of the Act). For further information about meeting these requirements, refer to the En route to Australia page.
To find out more about biosecurity requirements for airport operators, visit FPOE airport operators.
FPOE for aircraft
Australia and its territories have a number of first point of entry (FPOE) landing places. The map below provides some details of all of the FPOE airports and landing places for aircraft.
Aircraft operators must contact us if planning to land or unload goods at certain FPOE airports, as detailed on the airport list of locations, to ensure that biosecurity services can be appropriately provided.
Please be aware that there have been changes to the determination of landing places that may impact what classes of aircraft and goods are permitted to arrive at an FPOE. It is the obligation of the person in charge or operator of the aircraft to comply with FPOE determinations. Please see the determination for each landing place for current permissions.
Links to determinations are provided in the map below and in a text-only version of the Australian territory airports.
- Additional permission may also be required to land at some locations from the Australian Government’s National Passenger Processing Committee (NPPC).
- Airports that do not appear in either the map or the text only version are considered a Non-First Point (NFP) of Entry . Aircraft operators must request permission from us to land aircraft and/or unload goods at a NFP at least 10 business days prior to their intended landing in Australian territory.
Map of FPOE airports and landing places for aircraft
[expand all]
General entry requirements
Aircraft may only land at an FPOE after meeting mandatory biosecurity requirements for permission to land as well as information on regulatory obligations: pre-arrival reporting requirements, pratique, aircraft disinsection and mandatory in-flight announcements.
For further information about meeting these requirements please refer to the En route to Australia page.
Applications to land and unload goods must be submitted via email at least 10 business days prior to each flight arrival in Australian territory along with mandatory pre-arrival reporting.
FPOE Determinations
International aircraft must comply with the permissions and conditions contained on the FPOE determination. Each determination lists:
- permissions for particular classes of aircraft or goods that may be landed at the landing place
- Biosecurity Entry Points (BEPs) within the landing place
- any conditions associated with the landing place as an FPOE.
Determinations for existing FPOE landing places are available on the Federal Register of Legislation.
The person in charge or operator of the aircraft must also ensure that goods onboard are only unloaded at landing places that are determined as FPOE for those goods, unless permission has been granted under section 146 of the Act.
Read more
See the En route to Australia page for more information about landing goods at a non-first point of entry for those goods.
Biosecurity Entry Points (BEPs)
BEPs are designated areas within the landing place where specific classes of aircraft or goods must be landed in order to appropriately manage their biosecurity risks. These goods require additional infrastructure and procedures to manage the risks associated with their arrival.
If a BEP has been designated on a first point of entry determination, all specified aircraft or goods must arrive at, or be brought directly to the BEP on arrival into the landing place.
If you wish to unload goods at a BEP which is not determined for that class of goods, you will need to request permission under Section 146 of the Biosecurity Act 2015. For further information see How to request permission to land imported goods.
Non-First Points of Entry
Landing places that do not have a determination under section 223 of the Biosecurity Act are classed as non-first points of entry. These landing places have not been assessed against the FPOE Biosecurity Standards and may not have appropriate infrastructure or processes in place to manage biosecurity risks.
Aircraft will need to submit the relevant application (see more below) in order to gain permission to land their aircraft or unload goods at non-first points of entry. Aircraft will also have to apply to land or unload goods at a FPOE that is not determined for that particular class of goods.
The biosecurity risk of the classes of goods that aircraft operators wish to unload may not be able to be effectively managed at all FPOE or non-first points of entry. Applications are assessed on a case-by-case basis and are not guaranteed to be approved.
Some goods present a low biosecurity risk and wherever possible we accommodate requests to unload these goods at non-first points of entry or FPOE which may not be determined for such goods.
Some goods present a higher biosecurity risk and aircraft must be willing to provide further information and documentation to be assessed in these cases.
How to request permission to land at a non-first point of entry
Aircraft operators intending to land at a non-first point of entry must first apply for our permission under subsection 239(2) of the Biosecurity Act.
Aircraft operators/pilots should refer to the National Passenger Processing Committee (NPPC) Airport Guide to identify if NPPC approval is required for the airport at which they wish to arrive. If so, submit both an NPPC application and a Request to land aircraft or unload goods at a place not determined to be a point of entry in Australian territory form through NPPC at least 10 working days prior to the flight.
If NPPC approval is not required, submit the Request to land aircraft or unload goods at a place not determined to be a point of entry in Australian territory form by email to nonfirstpoint@aff.gov.au.
Read more
How to request permission to land imported goods
Certain classes of goods may only be landed at certain points.
Under the Biosecurity Act 2015, if the intended landing place is either:
- a non-first point of entry
- an FPOE but not determined to unload that particular class of goods
then the person in charge or operator of the aircraft must apply for permission to the department for the goods to be unloaded under subsection 146 (2) of the Act.
To apply for permission to discharge goods under subsection 146 (2) of the Act, submit a Request to land aircraft or unload goods at a place not determined to be a point of entry in Australian territory form by emailing to nonfirstpoint@aff.gov.au at least 10 working days prior to arrival.
Failure to submit an application 10 working days prior to arrival may prevent a permission being granted. Under section 145(2) of the Act it is an offence for goods subject to biosecurity control to be unloaded at a place that is not a first point of entry for those goods, if permission to unload as not been given.
Read more
- En route to Australia
- Aircraft application to find out more about landing either aircraft or goods at a non-first point of entry.