gain improved access to safe and effective agricultural and veterinary (agvet) chemicals, and assist them
in producing food for Australia and the world.
and Veterinary Medicines Authority (APVMA), grower groups, rural Research and Development
Corporations (RDCs) and the chemical industry to deliver this initiative.
The program has a range of activities:
supporting collaboration between growers, producers and the chemical industry on the access
needs of Australian agriculture
establishing an official Australian crop grouping list and associated APVMA guidelines (released
by the APVMA on 11 January 2019, accessible at Representative crops and extrapolation
principles for risk assessment and data waivers)
migrating some uses authorised under APVMA-issued permits to product labels
an assistance grants program to help fund the generation of sufficient data to support
applications to the APVMA
improving the prioritisation of grants to the needs of Australian agriculture.
In addition to the work taking place under the new funding, the government is also committed to 
reforming agvet chemicals regulation to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the system and
increase access to chemicals.
The department has progressed several initiatives with the new funding to improve access to agvet
chemicals, as listed below.
From 2018, the department has hosted collaborative forums annually to develop a priority list of
industry-nominated agvet chemical needs to inform each round of the Assistance Grants – Access to
Industry Priority Uses of Agvet Chemicals program. The collaborative forum expanded the role of
participants to produce a list more closely aligned with farmers’ agvet chemical needs. Participants
include RDCs, the National Farmers’ Federation, Animal Health Australia, Plant Health Australia and
the Australian federal and state and territory governments. The forum is also observed by the APVMA,
Animal Medicines Australia, CropLife Australia, Veterinary Manufacturers and Distributors Association
and international minor use experts.
The next collaborative forum will be held in 2027 to support grant round 12.
The APVMA has developed an official Australian list of crop groupings and associated guidelines.
The official crop grouping list reduces regulatory costs for producers to gain access to more uses of
agricultural chemicals.
Data generated for crops within a crop grouping can be applied to the whole crop with little or no
additional data needed. In practice, where a registration/permit has been gained for representative

crops, automatic extension or approval would be allowed to all other crops within the group (and
possibly across groups) without the need for additional data or review.
More information is available through the APVMA website.
The department provided a grant of $240 000 (GST not applicable) to the APVMA to examine permits
currently issued to peak industry bodies (involving uses in crops and livestock species) and determine
suitable candidate permits to migrate to product labels (registration), and liaise with the holders to
facilitate migration of permits to registrations.
The duration for a permit granted by the APVMA can vary from one season to up to 10 years. As permits
have a limited duration, permit holders must periodically submit applications to the APVMA to renew
permits. This may or may not require submission of new data. This renewal activity can consume a
significant amount of resources from stakeholders’ existing access to chemicals programs, as well as the
APVMA, as it has to assess these renewal applications. Migrating permit uses to product labels
eliminates the need for some existing permits and provides wider access to use.
For more information on this project, please contact the APVMA.
The department developed the Assistance Grants – Access to Industry Priority Uses of Agvet Chemicals
program to support the generation of sufficient data for applications to the APVMA for agvet chemical
uses identified as a priority by the collaborative forum. The next grant round will commence in the
2027/28 financial year, providing $3.5 million in grants.
The number and value of grants awarded in each round is recorded below:
2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2013-24 2024-25 2025
Grants
awarded 49
51
26
23
22
21
16
18
13
11
20
Total
grants
value ($
million)
1.61
2.5
1.76
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
3.5
Access to safe and effective agvet chemicals is important to Australian agricultural industries, the
community and the environment.
Farmers use agvet chemicals to protect crops and animals from pests and diseases, and treat infections.
However, Australian farmers sometimes have difficulty accessing agvet chemical uses available to
overseas competitors.
The small size of the Australian market can make the costs involved with registering an agvet chemical
in Australia uncommercial. This is particularly the case for treating pests and diseases in specialty crops
and livestock species. Larger industries face a similar problem when managing uncommon or emerging
pests and diseases. These agvet chemical access issues are often referred to as the ‘minor use’ issue.

The program will improve access to agvet chemicals and increase the number of uses available to
producers. To successfully deliver enduring improvements to access to agvet chemicals the program
will:
improve the ability of producers to effectively share their needs and priorities for uses of agvet
chemicals between themselves, grower groups, chemical companies and government.
improve producers’ access to a broader range of Australian approved uses for those agvet
chemicals already in the Australian market.
increase the number of approved uses that chemical companies choose to bring to the Australian
market when introducing a new agvet chemical to Australia.
The department continues to consult with stakeholders on other measures that could deliver these
improvements.
The government currently contributes funding to the RDCs to:
generate data to support applications for APVMA minor use permits
generate data to support applications through APVMA for a new label use.
The government also contributes to the APVMA’s Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals Minor Use
program (~$135 000 annually).
An initial $8 million was announced in the 2014-15 budget under the improved access program. A
further $6.3 million, $2.4 million and $9 million were committed in the 2018-19, 2020-21 and 2021-22
budgets respectively to continue the program through to 2024-25. Funding was further extended from
2024-25 to 2028-29 with an additional $8.1 million in funding.
Privacy Statement
All personal information handled by the department is protected in accordance with the Privacy Act
1988. Personal information means information or an opinion about an identified individual, or an
individual who is reasonably identifiable.
relation to views submitted by stakeholders to the department is for the purposes of exploring options
to deliver improved access to agvet chemicals and related purposes.
organisations where necessary for the above purposes, provided the disclosure is consistent with
relevant laws, in particular the Privacy Act 1988. Your personal information will be used and stored in
accordance with the Australian Privacy Principles.
complaint. Alternatively, telephone the department on +61 2 6272 3933.

Confidentiality
All content contained in submissions may be published on the department’s website or otherwise made
public, unless you specifically state you want all or part of your submission to be treated as confidential
information. Automatically generated confidentiality statements are not accepted by the department,
and a claim for confidentiality must be justified, and any such material provided as a separate
attachment, marked ‘Confidential’. Material marked ‘Confidential’ will not be published on the
department’s website.
Notwithstanding the above, no breach of confidence will occur if the department shares part or all of
your submission with a third party referred to under the heading ‘Privacy’ above in seeking external
advice or information in response to a submission.
Intellectual property
Responsibility for compliance with Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) in submissions rests with the
submission author(s), not with the department. In lodging your submission, you warrant that you have
not knowingly infringed any third party IPR. By lodging a submission, you grant to the Commonwealth
of Australia a permanent, irrevocable, royalty-free, world-wide, non-exclusive licence, (that is, a legal
permission, including a right of sub-licence) to use, copy, reproduce, adapt, communicate and exploit
all or any of the material contained in your submission.
personal information. It also contains details about how you can complain about a breach of the Privacy
Act by us, and how we will deal with such a complaint.
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/farm-food-drought/ag-vet-chemicals/improved-access-agvet-
chemicals