28 October 2025
Many developed countries provide high levels of agricultural support to pursue a large and growing list of objectives. Like many developed countries today, the Australian agricultural sector historically consisted of many small farms that received high levels of distortionary support. In recent decades Australia repurposed inefficient forms of support into more efficient forms of support. Australia has emerged from the reforms with a vibrant and resilient agricultural sector, which may provide lessons for other developed countries considering their own roads to reform.
12 June 2025
The operation and influence of non-tariff measures (NTMs) on trade flows can be complex, making the direct impact on trade and welfare unclear. This technical paper introduces a new approach of modelling the impacts of NTMs in a computable general equilibrium (CGE) model incorporating increases in trade (through export) costs and changes in consumer preferences. Both variable and fixed trade costs are considered.
28 March 2025
This Insights paper discusses the economic mechanisms by which the hundreds of billions of dollars provided annually in agricultural support contribute to increased emissions, biodiversity loss and soil nutrient imbalances. It also highlights options for alternative support policies and presents real-world examples of improved environmental outcomes stemming from agricultural support removal/reform.
18 March 2025
This Insights paper delves into the impact of non-tariff barriers on agriculture and presents new modelling results that show non-tariff barriers are equivalent to a 19% tariff - and are a billion-dollar burden on Australian agricultural exports. This report updates an earlier research paper, offering more detailed insight.
7 Nov 2024
This report uses an economic framework to examine the role of government in tracking Australia’s agricultural exports from ‘paddock-to-plate’. The report highlights fundamental economic principles that underpin decisions by government and industry to strengthen traceability and enhance market access – for example, by helping agricultural exporters meet emerging market access requirements on sustainability attributes.
20 Nov 2023
This technical report examines how changing regulations on the use of antimicrobial veterinary medicinal products and medicated feed could affect Australia’s food animal producers. ABARES modelled the epidemiological and economic impacts on an indicative intensive commercial piggery. Estimated financial and animal health consequences at the farm gate, as well as trade and market access implications, were presented.
13 May 2023
This journal article presents the challenges of quantifying non-tariff measures as ad valorem tariff equivalents at the commodity level. It builds a brief mathematical economic framework for deriving a gravity model of trade that could be used in the econometric quantification of non-tariff measures affecting Australia's agricultural exports.
Modelling the impacts of trade and agricultural reforms in Indonesia
6 April 2023
This report presents estimates of the economic impacts of some recent and possible future reforms to Indonesian agricultural and trade policies. These reforms were determined in consultation with the Centre for Indonesian Policy Studies.
This case study looks at the factors that have underpinned the success of the Australian live export industry in growing exports of cattle to Indonesia and Vietnam.
This case study looks at the factors that have underpinned the success of the Australian citrus industry in growing exports of oranges and mandarins to the ASEAN region.
Quantitative advice on the trade effects of different non-tariff measures is one aspect of the multifaceted decision-making process relating to the prioritisation of market access negotiations. This technical working paper proposes a methodology for quantifying the effects on trade costs and volumes of non-tariff measures on bilateral product-level trade.
Australian wine in China: Impact of China's anti-dumping duties (PDF)
27 Jul 2021
China's recent imposition of anti-dumping duties on Australia's wine exports has triggered interest in the recent growth of Australian wine sales to China. This article describes the industry's structure and developments in its trade trends, and analyses the impact of China's anti-dumping duties on Australian wine industry incomes nationally and regionally.
Australia's biosecurity market access and agricultural exports (PDF)
8 Jul 2021
This report assists industry and government’s understanding of what has contributed to Australian producers accessing new export market opportunities. Understanding the drivers for export expansion helps support growing agricultural trade value to contribute to the industry’s $100 bn target. The report identifies key drivers of Australia’s historical agricultural export growth following biosecurity market access. A paddock-to-plate framework for considering the growth of exports is provided, which will inform future commodity and country-specific case studies.
The economic impacts of regulating live sheep exports (PDF)
19 Feb 2021
Live sheep exports are an important part of the strategies that Western Australian sheep farms use to manage the risks associated with a short growing season in spring. This report explores the likely economic impacts of regulations designed to improve animal welfare and make the trade in live sheep more sustainable.
This short report describes the results of ABARES' modelling of the potential impact of China's barley tariff on Australian barley exports and the agricultural sector by 2025.
Analysis of government support to Australian agricultural producers (PDF)
29 May 2020
This report analyses government support for Australia’s farmers and has found that our agricultural producers are among the least subsidised in the world.
ABARES, in collaboration with the Academy of National Food and Strategic Reserves Administration (NFSRA) of China, undertook a two-year research project on agricultural price volatility and implications of China's policy responses for China, Australia and the rest of world.
Market access improvements: a case study of stone fruit exports to China (PDF)
3 Mar 2020
Improved market access to China has facilitated rapid growth of exports of Australian stone fruit since 2014. Australia gained access to the Chinese market for cherries in 2014, nectarines in 2016 and apricots, peaches and plums in 2017. Since then, China has become Australia’s most valuable stone fruit export market.
Free trade, competitiveness and a global world: How trade agreements are shaping agriculture (PDF)
11 Sep 2020
This report looks at the history of Australia's FTAs and how they have assisted with our export competitiveness and the growth of agricultural exports.
This is a technical academic presentation delivered at the annual conference of the Australasian Agricultural and Resource Economics Society (AARES) on 14 February 2019. The presentation includes both the slides and speaking notes used. The presentation described the challenges of quantifying non-tariff measures as ad valorem tariff equivalents at the commodity level.
Non-tariff measures affecting Australian agriculture
Mar 2019
Since the Uruguay Round Agreement on Agriculture came into effect on 1 January 1995, countries around the world have progressively reduced import tariffs and global agricultural trade has grown. The use of non-tariff measures (NTMs) has also grown. NTMs are 'policy measures other than ordinary customs tariffs that can potentially have an economic effect on international trade in goods, changing quantities traded, or prices or both' (UNCTAD 2012). This article provides an introduction to NTMs and explains their potential economic effects and prevalence in Australian agriculture.