Livestock
Reducing methane from livestock (DCCEEW)
This DCCEEW webpage Reducing methane from livestock provides information on research into reducing methane emissions through feeding and grazing practices.
Climate and environment (Dairy Australia)
This Dairy Australia website provides resources on sources of dairy emissions and Dairy Farm Emissions Reduction Strategies:
Environmental sustainability (Australian Pork)
This Australian Pork website provides information on research and resources for environmentally sustainable pork. There are 2 roadmaps for producers:
- Low Carbon Emission Roadmap (PDF 5 MB): to help understand emissions and learn what practices can be implemented to reduce emissions
- Closing the Loop (PDF 2 MB): to help understand how to minimise feed inputs, improve efficiency to minimise waste, utilise manure nutrients and discover new ways to manage hard waste.
Cropping, horticulture and forestry
Sustainability Initiative (Grains Research and Development Corporation)
The Grains Research and Development Corporation’s Sustainability Initiative (PDF 4.6 MB) summarises GRDC’s position and plan for ongoing investment in sustainability (including climate mitigation and adaptation). Work stream 2 of the initiative includes information on emissions reduction practices for the sector as well as references to relevant resources and tools.
Sustainability framework for Australian horticulture (Hort Innovation)
This Hort Innovation website provides information on sustainable agricultural practices within the Horticulture sustainability framework and links to industry-led sustainable production assurance programs (Hort360, EnviroVeg, Banana BMP, Freshcare Environmental and EcoHort).
Emissions Reduction Guide (Wine Australia)
This Wine Australia website provides an Emissions Reduction Roadmap, a reference manual containing tools, resources and advice to help Australia’s grapegrowers and winemakers take action in their own businesses.
FWPA Carbon Guides (Forest & Wood Products Australia)
This Forest & Wood Products Australia website provides information including the Forests & Wood Products and Australia’s Carbon Balance Guide that describes the key concepts associated with the life cycle of carbon in forests and forest products and provides guidance on forest management.
Additional
Accounting for Nature methods
The Accounting for Nature website has a catalogue of methodologies to measure and report on environmental assets to prepare an environmental account. Accounting for Nature is one approach to measuring environmental conditions.
Zero Net Emissions from Agriculture Cooperative Research Centre
The Zero Net Emissions from Agriculture Cooperative Research Centre aims to catalyse industry, community and government action to achieve zero net emissions from agriculture from 2040 and below zero net emissions by 2050. Its four research programs focus on:
- low-emissions plant solutions
- towards methane-free cattle and sheep
- whole-farm and mixed enterprise systems analysis
- delivering value from net zero.
Blue Carbon – Opportunities for First Nations Peoples
The Blue Carbon in Australia, understanding the opportunity for Indigenous People report provides information and mapping related to First Nations participation in Blue Carbon projects.