Principles for partnership and engagement
The renewal of the Australian Animal Welfare Strategy (AAWS) is being developed in line with the Australian Public Service (APS) Charter of Partnerships and Engagement. Throughout consultation, we are committed to:
- being transparent about how feedback is used
- providing opportunities for diverse voices to be heard
- supporting evidence- and science-based decision making.
A comprehensive governance framework oversees the renewal of the AAWS, with final oversight provided by Australia's Agriculture Ministers through the Agriculture Ministers' Meeting (AMM).
First Nations consultation
Australian Animal Welfare Strategy: First Nations consultation summary
This report reflects key themes identified through consultation with First Nations organisations and community members that was undertaken to inform the renewal of the Australian Animal Welfare Strategy (AAWS).
The Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry undertook a dedicated First Nations consultation program between May and July 2025, as part of the second round of consultation.
The program included 8 workshops with 3 held on Country in Katherine, Gundardie/Cooktown and the Torres Strait. It also included presentations and meetings involving representatives from more than 40 First Nations organisations and stakeholder groups.
A First Nations stakeholder engagement specialist led the engagements to support culturally appropriate consultation.
This consultation recognised the enduring cultural, spiritual and practical connections First Nations peoples have with animals and Country. The insights gathered will:
- help ensure the renewed AAWS is respectful, inclusive and relevant
- inform the development of the strategy and future decision-making.
Some feedback outside the scope of the AAWS has also been captured to inform future work where appropriate.
The second round of consultation
A second round of consultation commenced in March 2025 and sought feedback to support development of the renewed AAWS.
Consultation included:
- a public survey on the department's Have Your Say platform from 17 March to 14 April 2025
- stakeholder roundtables, workshops and interviews
- culturally appropriate First Nations engagement.
Participants provided feedback on whether actions from the previous AAWS remain relevant, along with priorities for the renewed strategy. This includes feedback on the Livestock and Production and Aquatic Animals chapters.
The published consultation summary outlines the key themes from the feedback received. This feedback will help ensure the renewed AAWS reflects contemporary science, evidence and Australia's modern animal welfare priorities.
The first round of consultation
The Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry conducted a first round of consultation on the renewal of the AAWS from 8 March 2024 to 8 July 2024.
Feedback received through this first round of consultation is helping to shape the development of the AAWS.
Australian Animal Welfare Strategy: consultation summary report
This report provides a thematic analysis of the stakeholder feedback received through the first round of consultation on the renewal of the Australian Animal Welfare Strategy (AAWS).
If you have difficulty accessing these files, contact us for help.
This first consultation included the release of a discussion paper through the department’s Have Your Say platform, which was open for input from 8 March to 30 June 2024.
The Have Your Say invited input through both survey and submissions, and was open to all Australians to share views and insights on the following aspects of the renewed AAWS:
- vision for the strategy
- work streams
- challenges and opportunities for animal welfare in Australia.
As part of the consultation process, the department held meetings with a broad range of stakeholders from across Australia's animal welfare system.
The department also commissioned a series of focus groups and interviews. These sought learnings from individuals involved in the previous AAWS, and input from key stakeholders on the renewal of the AAWS and development of a National Statement on Animal Welfare, which will underpin the renewed AAWS.