The Tasmanian Regional Forest Agreement (RFA) provides a framework for the sustainable management of Tasmania’s public and privately owned forests.
The Australian and Tasmanian Governments signed the Tasmanian RFA on 8 November 1997. It was varied on 18 August 2017 to extend its duration by 20 years and to establish an automatic extension mechanism, with subsequent five-yearly extensions contingent on satisfactory completion of five-yearly reviews.
Extending the Tasmanian RFA gives long-term stability to protections for biodiversity and heritage, and surety of resource access for industry, ensuring the whole community can continue to enjoy the many benefits that Tasmanian forests provide well into the future.
Current RFA
- 2017 Tasmanian RFA variation (PDF 702 KB)
- 2017 Tasmanian RFA variation (DOCX 89 KB)
- 2017 Tasmanian RFA variation - signed copy (PDF 2.0 MB)
- 2017 Consolidated Tasmanian RFA (includes multiple variations) (PDF 559 KB)
Previous RFA and variations
- 2007 variation to the Tasmanian RFA (PDF 200 KB)
- 2005 Supplementary Tasmanian Regional Forest Agreement
- 2001 Tasmanian RFA variation
- 1997 Tasmanian RFA (PDF 294 KB)
If you have difficulty accessing these files, contact us for help.
Extending the Tasmanian Regional Forest Agreement in 2017
The extension of the Tasmanian RFA was undertaken through a comprehensive process, following extensive assessment, public consultation, independent review and negotiation. Please refer to the diagram in the provided documents for a high-level summary of the rolling extension process.
Assessment
The assessment of forest-related environmental, social and economic values in Tasmania was undertaken as part of the extension process. This assessment provided an update to information in the Tasmanian Comprehensive Regional Assessment (CRA). The assessment is outlined in the provided documents.
Consultation
Stakeholders were given opportunities to provide feedback on the extension of the Tasmanian RFA. For further information about the consultation process and the Tasmanian forest management system, visit the Tasmanian Government Department of State Growth’s website.
Tasmanian RFA five-yearly reviews
It is a requirement of the Tasmanian RFA that its performance is reviewed every five years by an independent reviewer. The details of the Tasmanian RFA review process is outlined in the Tasmanian RFA.
A five-yearly review is currently underway. Further information is available at the link below:
The outcomes of the previous five-yearly reviews are available:
- Tasmanian RFA: First five-yearly review
- Tasmanian RFA: Second five-yearly review
- Tasmanian RFA: Third five-yearly review
Annual meetings
On 3 December 2024, officials from the Australian and Tasmanian Governments held the 2024 Tasmanian RFA annual meeting.
At this meeting senior officials considered the initial draft five-yearly review report for the period 2017-2022, discussed issues that had arisen since the previous annual meeting on 7 July 2022, and issued a communique:
Communiques from previous annual meetings are also available:
These annual meetings, to be held in the years between five-yearly reviews, are part of the Australian and Tasmanian Governments’ commitment to strengthened communications under the extended Tasmanian RFA.
Historical publications
Many historical publications informed the development of the Tasmanian RFA and continue to underpin the management of forests covered by the agreement.
Annual Reports were required for the first five years of each RFA.
If you have difficulty accessing these files, visit web accessibility for assistance.
The Tasmanian Land Tenure Maps identify the extent of the comprehensive adequate and representative reserve system in Tasmania, as of 1997:
| Document | File size | 
|---|---|
| Land Tenure (November 1997): A2 GIF | 144 KB | 
| Land Tenure (November 1997): A0 GIF | 439 KB | 
If you have difficulty accessing these files, visit web accessibility for assistance.
The Tasmanian Land Use Map identifies the area of reserves, private and multiple use land in Tasmania as of 1997:
| Document | File size | 
|---|---|
| Land Use (no date): A4GIF | 28 KB | 
If you have difficulty accessing these files, visit web accessibility for assistance.
| Document | File size | 
|---|---|
| Review of the Deep Red Myrtle Resource in Tasmania (April 2002) PDF | 1.4 MB | 
If you have difficulty accessing these files, visit web accessibility for assistance.
| Document | File size | 
|---|---|
| Tasmanian Social and Economic Report (no date) DOC | 3.9 MB | 
| Tasmanian Social and Economic Report (no date) PDF | 2.9 MB | 
If you have difficulty accessing these files, visit web accessibility for assistance.