Ending the Victorian RFAs
The five Victorian RFAs ended on 31 December 2024. This came following the Victorian Government’s decision to end native forest harvesting in the State and its notification to the Australian Government.
Native forest harvesting has now ended in Victoria. For further information on Victorian management of native forests please visit the Victorian Department of Energy, Environment and Climate Action website.
The Victorian Regional Forest Agreements (RFAs) were agreements between the State of Victoria and the Commonwealth of Australia which provided for sustainable forest management, certainty of access to resources for the renewable forestry industry, and a comprehensive conservation reserve network.
The Victorian RFAs established a long-term framework for the management and use of Victoria’s major forested regions to implement effective forest conservation, forest management and forest industry practices. The purpose of the Victorian RFAs was to provide:
- a comprehensive, adequate and representative (CAR) reserve system and provide for the conservation of those areas
- ecologically sustainable forest management (ESFM) and use of forests
- long-term stability of forests and forest-based industries.
There were five RFA regions in Victoria:
The RFA documents for each region can be accessed via the respective web pages above.
Major Event Review
The RFAs provided a framework for the continued sustainable management of Victoria’s forests and forest-based wildlife.
The 2019-20 bushfires have had significant impacts on forests, biodiversity, forestry industries and regional communities. The Australian and Victorian governments have agreed that, as a consequence of the 2019-20 bushfires in Victoria, a Major Event Review (MER) of the Victorian RFAs would be undertaken.
The MER was undertaken by an independent panel and informed by current information including scientific data and research, community perspectives, and Traditional Owner insights relating to the impacts of the bushfires on the RFA regions.
To find out more, visit our web page for the Major Event Review.
Extending the Victorian RFAs in 2020
Prior to the Victorian Government’s decision to end the RFAs, the Australian and Victorian governments had extended the Victorian RFAs in March 2020 by a further 10 years.
This extension followed assessment, public consultation, independent review and consideration.
The revised Victorian RFAs were intended to offer a modernised approach to forest management, through greater transparency, outcomes-focused reporting and long-term sustainability of a renewable industry.
A report was prepared to summarise the key changes that had been made to the Victorian RFAs as part of the modernisation and extension process.
Extending the Victorian RFAs in 2020: Assessment of RFA matters
To inform the extension of the Victorian RFAs, the Australian and Victorian governments undertook a further assessment of forest-related environmental, social and economic values in the Victorian RFA regions.
Extending the Victorian RFAs in 2020: Joint Victorian and Australian Government Consultation
The Australian and Victorian Governments jointly undertook extensive public consultation from 3 May to 7 July 2019 to inform the negotiation of extensions to Victoria’s 5 RFAs, including holding over 45 face to face events between 3 June and 7 July.
In total, 135 written submissions and 733 online survey responses were received, and over 330 participants took part in the face to face engagement sessions.
An independent report on the consultation outcomes across all 5 of Victoria’s RFA regions was released in December 2019.
A more detailed summary report of input and discussion at the engagement events was also independently prepared for each RFA region. These regional reports are also published below.
A report has been prepared to summarise how changes to modernise the Victorian RFAs have addressed the feedback received throughout the consultation process.
Memorandum of Understanding for extension of the Victorian RFAs
On 5 May 2018, the Victorian and Australian governments signed a Memorandum of Understanding to ensure that long term extensions and updates to the Victorian RFA framework could be agreed by 31 March 2020.
Downloads
MoU for the extension of the Victorian RFAs (PDF 1.2 MB)
MoU for the extension of the Victorian RFAs (DOCX 72 KB)
If you have difficulty accessing these files, visit web accessibility for assistance.
Annual meetings
The Australian and Victorian Governments have agreed to hold annual meetings as part of their commitment to strengthened communications under the extended Victorian RFAs.
On 31 March 2023, officials from the Australian and Victorian governments held their third annual meeting since the RFAs were extended.
At this meeting senior officials discussed the issues that had arisen since the previous annual meeting on 28 March 2022. The governments issued the following communique:
Communiques from previous annual meetings are also available:
- Victorian RFAs Annual Meeting of Officials 2021 Communique
- Victorian RFAs Annual Meeting of Officials 2022 Communique
Five-yearly reviews
It is a requirement of each of the Victorian RFAs that their performance is reviewed every five years. The details of the RFA review process is outlined in the agreements.
The five Victorian RFAs have been reviewed collectively: