i’ Be
eh =
A
j
AUSTRALIAN COMPETITION
i
& CONSUMER COMMISSION
23 Marcus Clarke Street
Canberra ACT 2601
Our ref:
PRJ1003050
GPO Box 3131
Contact officer: P|
Canberra ACT 2601
Contact phone:
tel: (02) 6243 1111
WWW.aCCC.goVv.au
20 February 2019
Regulation of Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals
Agvet Chemicals Branch
GPO Box 858
CANBERRA ACT 2601
Sent by email: agvetreform@agriculture.gov.au
Dear Ms Gaglia
Public consultation: Proposed changes fo timeshift applications and other measures,
and to support operational efficiency
The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) welcomes the opportunity
to comment on the proposals contained in the Exposure Draft of the Agricultural and
Veterinary Chemicals Legislation Amendment (Timeshift Applications and Other Measures)
Regulations 2018 (the Regulations) and the consultation paper on Proposed changes to
timeshift applications and other measures, and to support operational efficiency (the
consultation paper).
The ACCC understands that the Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority
(APVMA) administers a series of laws that regulate agricultural and veterinary (agvet)
chemicals, which may have commercial or household applications. Agvet chemicals that
have household applications must also comply with the requirements of the Australian
Consumer Law (ACL) where they fall within the definition of a ‘consumer good’.
The ACCC would like to comment on Proposal 3 of the consultation paper and Part 3 of the
proposed Regulations. The ACCC has concerns regarding the proposed removal of certain
products from regulation under the Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals Code Act 1994
(the Agvet Code) and the APVMA’s jurisdiction, on the grounds that deregulating these
products may create a regulatory gap and reduce the regulatory oversight of these products.
Role of the ACCC and the ACL
The ACCC is a whole of economy regulator that promotes competition and fair trading in
markets to benefit consumers, businesses and the Australian community. One of the
ACCC's key roles is to seek to ensure that consumers can confidently participate in markets.
Through the administration of the ACL, the ACCC aims to prevent misleading behaviour and
unconscionable conduct, and to minimise the risk posed by unsafe consumer goods.

Our product safety responsibilities involve identifying, prioritising and addressing risks arising
from unsafe consumer goods. We do this by administering the consumer product safety
provisions of the ACL, which include powers to issue compulsory recalls, product bans and
safety warning notices.
Potential action by the ACCC is assessed and undertaken according to a risk-based and
principles-based approach set out in our Compliance and Enforcement Policy. The ACCC
allocates resources to the issues that pose the greatest risk to consumers and prioritises
issues according to a published list of Product Safety Priorities. We are selective in the
matters we investigate, including the product safety matters we address. We cannot pursue
all matters that come to our attention.
Role of the ACCC and ACL in relation to agricultural and veterinary chemicals
Agvet chemicals that have household applications have to comply with the requirements of
the ACL if they are considered to be a consumer good. Consumer goods are defined as
goods that are intended for personal, domestic or household use.’ Where an agvet chemical
is considered to be a consumer good, the ACCC will accept notifications of a voluntary recall
on behalf of the Commonwealth Minister.
However, in recognition of the specialist mandate of the APVMA, the ACCC does not
generally take action in relation to agvet chemicals. Consistent with the Government's
Statement of Expectations, the ACCC seeks to avoid duplication of the supervisory activities
of other regulators, and considers whether outcomes could be achieved by using existing
regulations administered by another regulator. The ACCC also does not accept Mandatory
Injury Reports concerning agvet chemicals, as these are subject to an exemption in the
ACL? and are made directly to the APVMA.
Proposed deregulation of ‘low risk’ agricultural and veterinary chemicals
Part 3 of the Exposure Draft proposes to declare that certain substances are not an
agricultural or veterinary chemical and are therefore not subject to regulation by the APVMA.
These substances are:
*
carbon dioxide or nitrogen used as a fumigant
citronella oil used for a purpose other than as an insect repellent for use on human
beings, and
sheep branding substances.
Although the consultation paper notes that the risks with these substances can be
sufficiently addressed under other laws, such as consumer protection laws,* the ACCC
would like to note that removing these products from the scope of the Agvet Code may lead
to a regulatory gap and reduce the regulatory oversight of these products. The ACCC would
caution against any expectation that the ACL would provide the same or a similar level of
regulation.
Regulatory gap between consumer and non-consumer goods
As previously mentioned, a consumer good is one that is intended for personal, domestic or
household use. Citronella oil, when used as or in a consumer good (such as in a candle),
would likely fall within the scope of the ACL. However it appears unlikely that sheep branding
* Section 2 of the ACL.
2 Section 131(2)(c) of the ACL and Regulation 92 Competition and Consumer Regulations 2010.
* Department ofAgriculture and Water Resources, ‘Proposed changes fo timeshift applications and othermeasures, and to
Support operational efficiency,page 15.
2

substances, or carbon dioxide or nitrogen fumigants would be considered consumer goods
as these substances are generally used for an agricultural or commercial purpose. As a
result, it is unlikely that these products will fall within the scope of the ACL and the ACCC’s
regulatory functions if they are removed from the remit of the APVMA.
The proposed deregulation may therefore create a regulatory gap where some products
would not fall within the regulatory scope of either the ACCC or the APVMA. This means that
in the event of an unsafe incident, neither the ACCC nor the APVMA will:
receive mandatory injury reports regarding these products
receive voluntary recall notifications regarding these products, or
be able to introduce a compulsory recall for these products.
The ACCC is of the view that removing the above products from the Agvet Code will reduce
the regulatory oversight given to these products, and potentially lead to a regulatory gap that
the ACCC will not be able to fill.
ACCC role in regulating agricultural and veterinary chemicals
In the case where a deregulated product is also a consumer good, the ACCC is not able to
provide the same level of oversight for the deregulated product as the APVMA. Parliament
has identified an enhanced public risk associated with agvet chemicals and established the
APVMA as the specialist regulator of these products.
As a generalist regulator, the ACCC is unable to increase activity in areas vacated (in whole
or in part) by other regulators. The ACCC cannot replicate the focus and expertise that a
specialist regulator like the APVMA delivers. It is not sustainable to reduce or remove this
specialist regime and expect the same level of attention and expertise from the ACCC.
Furthermore, the ACL does not provide the same pre-market controls that are currently
mandated by the Agvet Code, such as registration and accreditation of products prior to
sale. The ACL is heavily weighted towards reactive, post-market controls, such as banning
or recalling products following an injury, illness or death. These post-market controls are not
a substitute for the pre-market controls that are currently applied to these products under the
Agvet Code.
If a product safety issue involving citronella, or other deregulated consumer goods, were to
arise under the proposed deregulated framework, the ACCC would assess these issues
along with all economy-wide product safety issues that come to the ACCC’s attention.
As the identified products are considered to be low risk under the APVMA’s regulatory
framework, the ACCC will take the specialist advice of the APVMA and is unlikely to
prioritise taking regulatory action in relation to citronella and any deregulated consumer
goods that are considered to be low risk.
Next Steps
The ACCC supports measures to improve the efficiency of product safety regimes in
Australia. However, we ask that you consider the implications of deregulating agvet
chemicals, including those considered to be low risk, from the Agvet Code. In particular, we
suggest that you consider potential regulatory gaps and any reduction in oversight that may
occur if these chemicals are no longer subject to regulation by the APVMA and the Agvet
Code.
3

If you would like to discuss any
aspect of the ACCC’s submission, we would be happy
to
Yours sincerely
Delia Rickard
Deputy Chair
4