AUSTRALIA 
Representing the best of the plant science industry 
,.-.._ 
SUBMISSION ON THE REVIEW OF AGRICULTURAL 
AND VETERINARY CHEMICALS LEGISLATION 
AMENDMENT ACT 2013
29 March 2019

S U B MI S S I O N O N T H E R E V I E W OF A G R I C U L T U R A L A N D V E T E R I N A R Y C H E M I C A L S L E G I S L A T I O N A M E N D ME N T A C T 2 0 1 3 
1 
1 
INTRODUCTION 
CropLife Australia is the national peak industry organisation representing the agricultural chemical 
and biotechnology (plant science) sector in Australia. CropLife makes this submission on behalf of 
our member companies who are the innovators, developers, manufacturers and formulators of 
chemical and biological crop protection products, and agricultural biotechnologies for plant 
breeding. 
CropLife welcomes the opportunity to participate in the review of the operation of the amendments 
to legislation made by the Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals Legislation Amendment Act 2013 
(the Amendment Act).  
While recognising that the Australian Pesticide and Veterinary Medicine Authority (APVMA) is 
scientifically competent and technically proficient, and the associated legislative and regulatory 
frameworks are robust, CropLife continues to be concerned with the structural and operational 
inefficiencies for agricultural chemical regulation in Australia. Furthermore, concerns remain with 
the ability of the APVMA to continue to improve its operational efficiency compared to its 
international equivalents.  
The fact that so many legislative changes and requirements remain outstanding, as referenced in 
the subsequent sections of this submission, really stands as testament to the fact that the 
Amendment Act was at best, a lost opportunity for genuine regulatory reform.  
1.1 
The true effectiveness of legislative reforms introduced in 2014 has been 
hidden by the disruption caused by the physical relocation of the APVMA 
The disruption caused by the physical relocation of the APVMA is likely to be felt for some years 
after the relocation has been completed.  Despite the APVMA’s commendable efforts to overhaul 
its internal procedures, substantial reform is still urgently required to assist the APVMA during this 
very challenging period. 
To assist in developing meaningful legislative amendments that enable the APVMA to meet their 
legislative requirements and conduct their core business during the transition of the Regulator to 
with a range of urgent regulatory and legislative reform proposals for consideration in July 2017. 
These proposed measures would allow the APVMA to efficiently register products during the current 
capability 
crisis 
and 
ensure 
Australian 
agricultural 
productivity 
remains 
competitive. 
Disappointingly, few of these proposed legislative reforms have been included in the recent 
legislative amendment Bills, and those that have, have been amended such that they are unlikely 
to achieve the intended outcome of the original proposal.  
1.2 
Defined efficiency gains from legislative reforms introduced in 2014 have 
not yet been realised 
The Australian National Audit Office’s (ANAO) 2017 performance audit report on the implementation 
of pesticide and veterinary medicine regulatory reform highlights the serious failure of the reform 
processes to deliver real regulatory efficiency1.  
Promising signs emerged in 2016, with the APVMA’s timeframe performance for assessing 
pesticide applications within statutory timeframes reaching 83 per cent in the September quarter. 
These promising signs, however, were devastated during 2017, with the Regulator achieving only 
24 per cent of work within statutory timeframes for crop protection products in the June 2017 
quarter. While timeframe performance for approvals of crop protection products has improved 
1
Pesticide and Veterinary Medicine Regulatory Reform, Australian National Audit Office website, 
sourced 29 June 2017, https://www.anao.gov.au/work/performance-audit/pesticide-and-veterinary-
medicine-regulatory-reform

S U B MI S S I O N O N T H E R E V I E W OF A G R I C U L T U R A L A N D V E T E R I N A R Y C H E M I C A L S L E G I S L A T I O N A M E N D ME N T A C T 2 0 1 3 
2 
recently, it has taken two years to return to the level seen prior to the relocation announcement in 
the September 2016 quarter, at 86 per cent in the December 2018 quarter. These improvements in 
overall performance are welcomed, however, it is alarming that just 57 per cent of complex 
applications that would deliver Australian farmers new, innovative crop protection products are 
being approved within timeframe. The APVMA’s continued inability to finalise the more complex 
agricultural chemical applications within timeframe denies Australian farmers access to new and 
innovative products that the plant science industry provides, further limiting the ability of farmers to 
improve productivity and compete internationally. Again, it must be emphasised that any 
measurement of the operational gains made by the 2013 legislative reforms are confounded by the 
high attrition of experienced technical staff from the agency due to its relocation to Armidale.  
The Department imposed the previous Government’s 2013 reform package on the APVMA without 
realistic implementation timeframes or sufficient funding, which has also directly contributed to the 
poor assessment by the ANAO. The proposed legislative changes presented in the Agricultural and 
Veterinary Chemicals Legislation Amendment (Operational Efficiency) Bill 2017, currently before 
the Senate, are not the urgent reforms needed to streamline APVMA operations in respect to the 
organisation’s transition to Armidale. Rather, they are necessary minor amendments to reduce 
regulatory burden and improve operational efficiency, and have still not been delivered, three years 
later than originally promised.  
Nevertheless, following public consultation, the Operational Efficiency Bill 2017 received not only 
industry support, but also bipartisan government support, until the Government introduced an 
amendment to that Bill to deliver on its announcement during the 2018 Federal Budget to reinstate 
the APVMA’s Governing Board. As a result, the Operational Efficiency Bill 2017 has not yet passed 
the Senate, further delaying the introduction of the proposed measures to rectify errors contained 
in the 2013 reform package.  
1.3 
Calls for urgent, targeted and well-considered reform unheeded 
The proposed additional legislative changes presented in the Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals 
Legislation Amendment (Streamlining Regulations) Bill 2018 (the Streamlining Regulations Bill) 
again fail to deliver the urgent and targeted reform required to streamline APVMA regulatory 
functions that will assist the APVMA during its transition to Armidale, and indeed transition it to a 
next generation regulator. The one proposal that may have delivered tangible efficiency gains for 
industry and delivered critical crop protection tools to Australian farmers – a pathway for provisional 
registration – was removed from the Streamlining Regulations Bill following consultation with 
affected industries, as it contained limitations that would have negated any potential benefit. 
Instead, the proposed measure would simply have created additional administrative burden for the 
APVMA to implement. The Streamlining Regulations Bill came at a historic low-point in industry 
confidence in the Department’s capability to deliver effective and implementable regulatory reform. 
CropLife has, for more than 12 months, sought the urgent implementation of well-considered 
regulatory reform to address the expected significant resource and capability losses of experienced 
regulatory scientists by the APVMA during its transition to Armidale. Despite constructively 
engaging in several reform consultation processes with the Department, numerous legislative 
reforms, which would have significant benefit to industry, are yet to be passed into legislation. 
CropLife and our members are disappointed by the Government’s apparent lack of urgency in 
drafting and implementing the urgent and necessary legislative reform required to assist the APVMA 
in meeting their legislative requirements and conducting their core business during the transition of 
the Regulator to Armidale. To assist in achieving this outcome, CropLife and our members 
developed a range of urgent regulatory and legislative reform proposals, which were submitted to 
the Department for consideration in July 2017.  
Urgent, well-considered reform is required to maintain a high level of integrity in Australia’s 
agricultural and veterinary chemical regulatory system, and in-turn maintain community confidence.

S U B MI S S I O N O N T H E R E V I E W OF A G R I C U L T U R A L A N D V E T E R I N A R Y C H E M I C A L S L E G I S L A T I O N A M E N D ME N T A C T 2 0 1 3 
3 
1.4 
Missing reforms 
Disappointingly, few of CropLife’s proposed measures have been included in the recent legislative 
amendment Bills, which instead include proposals that are predominantly administrative 
corrections, aimed at delivering minor internal efficiency improvements. CropLife has strongly 
advocated for the introduction of an Agricultural Benefit Test, similar to the risk/benefit argument 
required in New Zealand, to limit the number of applications received and assessed by the APVMA. 
Where there is no benefit to Australian agricultural productivity, the Regulator need not expend 
limited resources on registering another product where there are already many closely similar 
products registered and available to the market.  
Similarly, CropLife has long advocated for increased utilisation of international regulatory 
information. While the APVMA has improved their use of international data and assessments via 
operational improvements, CropLife proposed the introduction of an interim international 
recognition registration system. In specific situations where the proposed use pattern is the same, 
interim international recognition registration would enable Australian farmers to access new and 
innovative products based on the product’s registration by a respected overseas regulator, with only 
necessary Australian-specific assessments conducted by the APVMA. This would allow the APVMA 
to efficiently register products during the current capability crisis and ensure Australian agricultural 
productivity remains competitive.  
Both proposed legislative reform measures would achieve the Department’s intention of improving 
the access of farmers to key crop protection tools that only their international counterparts currently 
enjoy, while improving the internal operational efficiency of the Regulator and allowing them to focus 
on achieving their core business goals. It is therefore disappointing to CropLife and our members, 
as well as to Australian agriculture more broadly, that neither proposal was included in the 
Streamlining Regulations Bill.  
It is beyond time that the Department and the APVMA deliver tangible ongoing improvements to 
the regulation of agricultural chemicals in Australia, otherwise the hundreds of millions of dollars 
every year in lost productivity currently experienced due to regulatory inefficiency will continue and 
worsen into the future. 
CropLife and our members have constructively engaged for years in all previous reform agendas 
and proposed specific initiatives to improve the system. Despite our frustration with the slow 
process and lack of proper implementation of these reforms, we remain committed to continuing to 
work constructively with the Government to ensure Australia has the world’s best agricultural 
chemical regulator. 
The importance of this Regulator maintaining its technical competencies, whilst significantly 
improving efficiencies, is crucial to the plant science industry and the nation’s farming sector. It’s 
simply beyond time for the development and implementation of real reform that delivers genuine 
improvements to the Regulator’s efficiency. That stated, the industry does not have faith that the 
Department has the capacity, competencies or inclination to properly develop such a legislative 
reform package, and also has concerns that the APVMA needs a period of some years to stabilise 
in light of the disruption it has been subjected to over the last five or more years.

S U B MI S S I O N O N T H E R E V I E W OF A G R I C U L T U R A L A N D V E T E R I N A R Y C H E M I C A L S L E G I S L A T I O N A M E N D ME N T A C T 2 0 1 3 
4 
2 
APPLICATION ASSESSMENT 
EFFICIENCY AND EFFECTIVENESS 
The true measure of the effective operation of the amendments contained in the Amendment Act is 
being hidden by the disruption caused by the physical relocation of the APVMA to Armidale. While 
timeframe performance for approval of crop protection products has improved recently, it has only 
just recovered to the level seen prior to the relocation announcement in the September 2016 
quarter, at just 86 per cent in the December 2018 quarter. These improvements in overall 
performance are welcomed, however, it is alarming that just 57 per cent of complex applications 
that would deliver Australian farmers with new, innovative crop protection products are being 
approved within timeframe.  
While CropLife and our members have observed some recent improvements in predictability of 
assessment timeframes, it is unclear whether this is a direct consequence of the introduction of an 
‘elapsed time’ model to replace the previous ‘stop the clock’ model. Instead, it appears this 
improvement is a consequence of operational efforts by the APVMA to meet timeframes more 
consistently and is unrelated to the method used to measure assessment timeframes.  
Nevertheless, the introduction of timeshift applications has significantly improved the predictability 
of applications eligible for that pathway. CropLife has long advocated for and supported the 
expansion of the current timeshift application options contained in the Agricultural and Veterinary 
Chemicals Legislation Amendment Regulations 2018. CropLife welcomes the passing of these 
reforms into legislation.  
These changes will incentivise registrants to begin the longer assessments of chemistry, worker 
health and safety and environmental safety, while residue, efficacy and crop safety trials are being 
conducted. This will contribute a meaningful improvement to market access, ultimately improving 
farmers’ access to innovative, new crop protection products. 
The intent of the 2014 regulatory reforms, which was to restrict the information that the APVMA can 
take into account when considering an application, must be maintained, However, to ensure the 
efficiency gains delivered in that reform process are not compromised, it is essential that project 
plans are structured in such a manner that data packages developed and submitted following 
project plan initiation are submitted in full. 
CropLife and our members consider that the ‘shut the gate provisions’ have been effective in 
improving application quality. Expansion of the APVMA’s current timeshift application provisions will 
enable applicants to negotiate project plans with the APVMA, to set out the timeframe for conducting 
necessary assessments and facilitate more timely application assessments. In this manner, 
applicants may provide data required for chemistry and toxicology assessments while 
Australian-specific efficacy and environmental safety data is generated in a structured and 
predictable manner. Similarly, the pre-application assistance program provides applicants with 
additional confidence that an application meets the APVMA’s requirements prior to submission.  
Retention of the preliminary assessment process is supported. The preliminary assessment 
process is essential for ensuring that an application has been submitted correctly and that all 
relevant assessment modules have been addressed by the application.  
CropLife supports the view that providing the APVMA more flexibility to manage minor errors at 
preliminary assessment would remove some of the unnecessary administrative burden currently 
placed on the APVMA and applicants. As such, the proposal presented in the Agricultural and 
Veterinary Chemicals Legislation Amendment Regulations 2018 consultation document to enable 
the APVMA to provide one opportunity for an applicant to address identified deficiencies during 
preliminary assessment is supported. It is paramount, however, that sufficient guidance is 
developed operationally by the APVMA to ensure consistency in what is considered to be 
reasonably rectifiable. Until such guidance has been developed and the APVMA’s requirements are 
clear, imposing additional fees on applicants for not providing all required information is not 
acceptable.

S U B MI S S I O N O N T H E R E V I E W OF A G R I C U L T U R A L A N D V E T E R I N A R Y C H E M I C A L S L E G I S L A T I O N A M E N D ME N T A C T 2 0 1 3 
5 
Limiting the proposed measure to just one opportunity for the applicant to address identified 
deficiencies is essential to avoid increasing administrative burden by allowing applicants to 
repeatedly correct mistakes that are considered by the APVMA to be reasonably rectifiable.  
CropLife has long advocated for increased utilisation of international regulatory information and is 
pleased that the APVMA has improved their use of international data and assessments via practical 
and efficient operational improvements. The improved use of international data and assessments 
is now being realised as efficiency gains in the application assessment process.  
It is disappointing, however, that CropLife’s proposal to introduce an interim international 
recognition registration system has not been included in recent legislative amendment Bills. In 
specific situations where the proposed use pattern is the same, interim international recognition 
registration would enable access by Australian farmers new and innovative products based on the 
product’s registration by a respected overseas regulator, with only necessary Australian-specific 
assessments conducted by the APVMA. This would allow the APVMA to efficiently register products 
during the current capability crisis and ensure Australian agricultural productivity remains 
competitive.  
Both proposed legislative reform measures would achieve the Department’s intention of improving 
farmers’ access to key crop protection tools that only their international counterparts currently enjoy, 
while improving the internal operational efficiency of the Regulator and allowing them to focus on 
achieving their core business goals.  
CropLife does not support the introduction of greater flexibility in the time period within which 
applicants may rectify defects in applications. The information required to rectify an application is 
non-technical and generally administrative. As such, the additional information can be provided 
quickly by the applicant. Allowing greater flexibility for applicants to provide non-technical and 
administrative information may inadvertently erode the efficiencies gained by implementing the 
‘stop the clock provisions’.  
While CropLife supports efforts by the Department and the APVMA to improve application quality, 
it is essential that tailored, detailed guidance material is developed in collaboration with industry to 
ensure that the APVMA’s requirements are fully realised by applicants.

S U B MI S S I O N O N T H E R E V I E W OF A G R I C U L T U R A L A N D V E T E R I N A R Y C H E M I C A L S L E G I S L A T I O N A M E N D ME N T A C T 2 0 1 3 
6 
3 
RECONSIDERATIONS 
The introduction of work plans and statutory timeframes for the completion of reconsiderations has 
improved transparency regarding the intent and progress of chemical reconsiderations. In addition, 
focussing reconsiderations on specific areas of concern, and specifying the information the APVMA 
must take into account for a reconsideration, have significantly improved the efficiency of the 
reconsideration process. 
Prior to July 2014, chemical reconsiderations were not time-limited. That is, the APVMA was not 
required to complete reconsiderations within a statutory timeframe. Instead, the timeframe of each 
reconsideration varied, determined by its scope. Under the previous legislative requirements, 
companies were permitted to provide information relevant to the reconsideration at any time. While 
it is extremely important that the APVMA has access to all available scientific information in order 
to conduct their detailed assessments, allowing for the provision of additional data during the 
reconsideration process often resulted in the revision of component risk assessment reports. This, 
in turn, required additional consultation and publication, significantly delaying the finalisation of the 
review.  
Legislative amendments that came into effect on 1 July 2014 limited the maximum prescribed 
timeframe to complete a formal reconsideration to 57 months and a prescribed formula was 
developed to determine the appropriate timeframe required to assess each chemical. Companies 
are still required by law to immediately provide any relevant, new scientific information to the 
APVMA that either contradicts the current information entered in the record or shows that a product 
or constituent may not meet the safety, trade or efficacy criteria. In order to be considered as a part 
of the reconsideration process, the new data must, however, be provided within defined timeframes 
(with exceptions where absolutely necessary).  
These legislative amendments ensure that future reconsiderations will be conducted in a more 
transparent, predictable and efficient process. Unfortunately, while a number of significant chemical 
reconsiderations were tracking to be completed by their newly determined statutory deadlines 
during 2017 and 2018, CropLife believes the relocation of the APVMA to Armidale from Canberra 
and subsequent loss of experienced staff delayed their finalisation.  
This disruption is likely to be felt for some years after the relocation has been completed. As the 
APVMA’s reconsideration program is a public benefit function, CropLife recommends it be funded 
through general revenue, in line with the APVMA’s international regulatory counterparts. This would 
improve the Regulator’s capability in this important area and neutralise criticisms and concerns 
regarding the APVMA’s independence. 
CropLife strongly supports repeal of the re-approval and re-registration scheme in Australia which 
was enacted by the Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals Legislation Amendment (Removing 
Re-approval and Re-registration) Act 2014.  
The APVMA takes new data and scientific information into account when considering the ongoing 
safety of a registered product. Under Section 161 of the Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals Code 
Act 1994, agricultural chemical registrants have a statutory obligation to provide the APVMA with 
any relevant new data regarding their products, as and when it becomes available. Information is 
relevant if it either contradicts the current information entered in the record or shows a product or 
constituent may not meet the safety, trade or efficacy criteria.  
This provides a highly responsive regulatory review system, where a formal review or 
‘reconsideration’ focusses on new scientific information, rather than a purely administrative process 
and it can be initiated at any time. Under this regulatory scheme, the ongoing human, animal health 
and/or environmental safety of an agricultural or veterinary chemical product is constantly monitored 
and action triggered by the provision of credible, new scientific information that questions the 
existing regulatory conditions. Far from highlighting a failure of the regulatory sector in Australia, 
the APVMA’s proactive and comprehensive response to the 2015 International Agency for 
Research on Cancer (IARC) monograph on glyphosate highlights the responsive and transparent 
nature of the APVMA’s regulatory process.

S U B MI S S I O N O N T H E R E V I E W OF A G R I C U L T U R A L A N D V E T E R I N A R Y C H E M I C A L S L E G I S L A T I O N A M E N D ME N T A C T 2 0 1 3 
7 
APVMA regulatory decisions following nominations for reconsideration are based on science and 
evidence, not the commercial interests of the various industry stakeholders affected by the 
APVMA’s decisions, or the political pressure resulting from activist, anti-modern farming campaigns 
that rapidly permeate the media commentary and community sentiment. Anyone can nominate a 
chemical or chemical product for reconsideration by the APVMA, however, a nomination is only 
accepted where there is a scientific basis for the nomination.  
The APVMA often initiates interim regulatory action during a formal reconsideration to mitigate any 
risks identified in relation to the use of the chemical under investigation. In this manner, 
unacceptable risks associated with the use of an agricultural or veterinary chemical product can be 
managed prior to the finalisation of a complex and lengthy formal reconsideration.  
All proposed regulatory decisions relating to the reconsideration of an existing product are subject 
to a comprehensive and transparent period of public consultation prior to being finalised. 
While the European Union (EU), Canadian and American regulators all employ cyclical re-approval 
and re-registration schemes, this model demonstrates in all jurisdictions that it is unnecessarily 
burdensome and duplicative, resulting in lengthy delays to assessment timeframes.  
Health Canada’s Pesticide Management Regulatory Agency (the PMRA) has publicly stated that 
the current re-evaluation workload is not sustainable, and the agency lacks the resources to cope 
with the upcoming wave of re-evaluations. In fact, the PMRA is currently reviewing its re-approval 
and re-registration program to explore adopting alternative post-market review processes. There 
are more than 70 active constituents scheduled for cyclical re-evaluation by the PMRA. This number 
is, however, expected to increase significantly over the next 10 years, as around 370 older active 
constituents re-evaluated in the early 2000s are scheduled to enter the cyclical re-evaluation 
system. Similarly, as of June 2018 there are 23 active constituents subject to a Special Review. 
Although these reviews typically take around two to four years to complete, the PMRA has indicated 
that they expect almost half (43 per cent) to exceed four years. 
Similar to Canada’s PMRA, the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) conducts registration 
reviews of registered pesticides every 15 years to determine whether they continue to meet existing 
standards for registration and has the ability to conduct a Special Review at any time. As of the end 
of the 2017 financial year, the US EPA has completed and implemented the final decisions of less 
than one-third of registration reviews commenced since 2007. 2  
When compared with single jurisdiction countries, such as Australia, the United States and Canada, 
the EU regulatory system, with the ability to split the considerable regulatory burden of re-assessing 
all chemicals every 10 or 15 years3 among member states, should be more capable of managing a 
cyclical re-assessment program. The EU re-assessment program is, however, not delivering the 
desired outcomes in a timely fashion, with less than 14 per cent of scheduled re-assessments 
finalised since its introduction in 2007.4 Noting that approval is extended where the re-assessment 
is delayed for reasons beyond the control of the applicant5, it is difficult to see just what this process 
is achieving, other than draining the regulator’s resources, clogging up the regulatory system and 
distracting European regulators from reacting to, and assessing genuine areas of concern.  
Rather than directing regulatory attention to specific areas where there is credible scientific 
evidence demonstrating potential risks to human and animal health or environmental safety, EU 
regulators are instead conducting lengthy, unnecessary reviews of entire data packages, where 
there is no cause for concern. This distraction does not serve the best interests of government, 
chemical product manufacturers, farmers or consumers within the EU. 
2
3
4
5
https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2018-03/documents/mf-accomp-reevaluation-fy17-final_1.pdf  
Active substances are renewed for 15 years under the current Regulation (EC) 1107/2008 Article 14.2, 
and for 10 years in the preceding legislation Directive 91/414/EEC Article 4.4 
ECPA (European Crop Protection Association) estimations 
 Regulation (EC) 1107/2009, Article 17

S U B MI S S I O N O N T H E R E V I E W OF A G R I C U L T U R A L A N D V E T E R I N A R Y C H E M I C A L S L E G I S L A T I O N A M E N D ME N T A C T 2 0 1 3 
8 
The demonstrated inability of these much larger and highly experienced regulators to implement a 
successful, efficient re-registration program, despite receiving substantial government funding, 
serves to highlight that such programs are not feasible and do not serve the best interests of our 
community. Introducing a similar, unnecessary and duplicative system in Australia should continue 
to be avoided.

S U B MI S S I O N O N T H E R E V I E W OF A G R I C U L T U R A L A N D V E T E R I N A R Y C H E M I C A L S L E G I S L A T I O N A M E N D ME N T A C T 2 0 1 3 
9 
4 
COMPLIANCE AND ENFORCEMENT 
CropLife has long advocated for increased compliance and enforcement powers to be granted to 
the APVMA and, as such, supported the provisions contained within the Amendment Act. While it 
could be argued that insufficient time has passed to allow a thorough consideration of the operation 
of these provisions, the APVMA appears to have utilised the increased ability to enforce compliance 
to good effect. Noting the significant and growing problem of counterfeit and illegal crop protection 
products around the world, it is crucial that the APVMA has all necessary powers and ensures that 
its compliance and enforcement efforts remain focused on the highest threat and risk areas to the 
community and farming sector. 
As the APVMA’s compliance and enforcement capabilities perform a public benefit function, 
CropLife recommends it be funded through general revenue, to further improve the Regulator’s 
capability in this important area. 
While CropLife supports any effort to simplify the legislation, replacing legislative offences with 
conditions of registration serves only to shorten the legislation and does not resolve its inherent 
complexity or simplify compliance activities. 
CropLife support the use of a single consolidated legislative instrument governing Commonwealth 
compliance activities. Triggering the regulatory powers act will significantly reduce the length of the 
APVMAs legislation, improve consistency in decision-making and make it easier for the industry to 
know their rights and responsibilities. 
CropLife strongly supports the use of legislative instruments to enable the APVMA to quickly and 
efficiently enact change. This activity must, however, be sufficiently resourced and empowered 
through the APVMA with a transparent mechanism to allow industry engagement. CropLife’s 
experience with legislative instruments has demonstrated that once the Department becomes 
involved, productivity and efficiency gains diminish significantly. It is noted that the current licencing 
scheme for veterinary chemical products is captured by an existing legislative instrument. CropLife 
does not support any extension of the licensing scheme to include the manufacture of agricultural 
chemical products in Australia.

S U B MI S S I O N O N T H E R E V I E W OF A G R I C U L T U R A L A N D V E T E R I N A R Y C H E M I C A L S L E G I S L A T I O N A M E N D ME N T A C T 2 0 1 3 
10 
5 
IMPROVE CONSISTENCY IN DATA 
PROTECTION PROVISIONS 
CropLife has long advocated for greater incentives in the form of extended data protection periods 
for product registrants to generate data to support the ongoing registration of crop protection 
products in Australia, and to extend the use of registered products into minor uses and specialty 
crops. While CropLife and our members support the extension of data protection periods, the 
provisions remain complex and difficult for product registrants to understand.  
Insufficient time has elapsed to facilitate a thorough assessment of the introduced measure to 
extend the data protection period provided to applicants when submitting relevant, required data to 
a chemical reconsideration. Nevertheless, CropLife and our members consider that increasing the 
data protection period to eight years from the reconsideration decision point is a significant incentive 
for applicants to invest in conducting relevant trials to generate the required data to support the 
ongoing registration of a registered product. 
CropLife has long advocated for and as such, supports the introduction of additional data protection 
for the addition of minor uses to existing product labels, as proposed in the Streamlining Regulations 
Bill 2018. This proposal will complement the crop groupings project and minor use programs. We 
do not, however, support the proposal to provide longer data protection periods to animal species, 
simply because of the small number of animal commodity groups. The duration of additional data 
protection periods should instead reflect the cost of data generation and identified industry priorities. 
Consideration should be given to linking the proposed increases in limitation and protection periods 
with identified industry priorities, as outlined in the 2016 project report Delivery of Access to AgVet 
Chemicals Collaborative System6, which was funded by the Department. 
CropLife and our members support, in principle, the proposal to consider ‘protected information’ 
and ‘information with limits on its use’ equitably and consistently throughout the Agvet Code, 
thereby increasing the protection period associated with ‘protected information’ to eight years 
instead of the current three to five years. However, it is noted that CropLife has consistently 
advocated for a period of 10 years or longer to encourage innovation in new crop protection 
technologies.  
CropLife does not consider that the responsibility for determining compensation for the use of 
protected information or information with limits on its use to lie with the APVMA. The responsibility 
for determining both the use of, and compensation for the use of protected information or 
information with limits on its use should lie solely with the holder of that information. As such, 
CropLife does not oppose removing Part 3 from the Agvet Code. 
6
https://www.agrifutures.com.au/wp-content/uploads/publications/17-019.pdf

S U B MI S S I O N O N T H E R E V I E W OF A G R I C U L T U R A L A N D V E T E R I N A R Y C H E M I C A L S L E G I S L A T I O N A M E N D ME N T A C T 2 0 1 3 
11 
6 
LEGISLATION IMPROVEMENTS 
CropLife and our members consider that the reorganisation and simplification of the Agvet Code 
has improved its readability, however, it remains a complex legislative document. Rather than the 
current piecemeal amendments, any future revision of the Agvet Code should be comprehensive 
and would benefit from better resourcing to ensure a more thorough and well-considered outcome 
for both the APVMA and industry. That stated and as previously referenced, the industry, as a result 
of the previous experiences with regulatory reform in this area, does not have confidence in the 
ability of the Department to undertake such a major legislative reform process and it is clear that a 
period of legislative stability may be required to allow the APVMA to continue to focus on internal 
operational efficiencies.

S U B MI S S I O N O N T H E R E V I E W OF A G R I C U L T U R A L A N D V E T E R I N A R Y C H E M I C A L S L E G I S L A T I O N A M E N D ME N T A C T 2 0 1 3 
12 
7 
VARIATIONS TO RELEVANT 
PARTICULARS AND CONDITIONS 
The ability to vary relevant particulars and conditions of an approval or registration in certain 
circumstances via ‘notification’ or as a ‘prescribed variation’ is valuable. It has proven to be very 
effective for the Australian plant science industry. The expansion of this instrument via the 
March 2019 revision is welcomed. 
CropLife supports the proposal to further expand this concept to other application types and 
particulars as the proposed measure presents opportunities to reduce regulatory burden on the 
agricultural and veterinary chemical industries, as well as the APVMA, by enabling certain low risk 
regulatory variations to be made via legislative instruments.  
It is essential, however, that sufficient time is provided prior to the implementation of this measure 
to ensure that appropriate legislative instruments are developed in consultation with industry.

S U B MI S S I O N O N T H E R E V I E W OF A G R I C U L T U R A L A N D V E T E R I N A R Y C H E M I C A L S L E G I S L A T I O N A M E N D ME N T A C T 2 0 1 3 
13 
8 
CONCLUSION 
Approved and registered crop protection chemical products are safe, cost-effective, efficient, 
essential and sustainable tools for farmers to use for control of pests, weeds and diseases. They 
represent a core input for modern farming systems. A streamlined, effective regulator capable of 
delivering timely risk assessments, approvals and registrations is essential for Australian 
agriculture.  
The expansion of timeshift to all complex applications in March 2019 is welcomed as it will 
significantly improve the predictability of applications, provide greater flexibility for registrants and 
improve regulatory efficiency.  
CropLife does not support an entirely unnecessary, non-value added, bureaucratic and 
administrative re-approval and re-registration program. The demonstrated inability of much larger 
modern regulators to implement a similar program, despite receiving substantial government 
funding, serves to highlight that such programs are not feasible, or required, and do not serve the 
best interests of the community. In fact, it is clear from all overseas experience that these programs 
only serve to diminish and distract regulators from effectively focusing on critical areas essential for 
the protection of the farming sector and our broader community. Introducing a similar, unnecessary 
and duplicative system in Australia should continue to be avoided. The APVMA currently has a 
world-renowned regulatory scheme with a responsive chemical reconsideration program. 
Regulatory action is triggered by the provision of credible, new scientific information that questions 
the existing regulatory conditions of a product, such that a reconsideration can be initiated at any 
time. This is a proven highly effective and targeted method of addressing risks as and when they 
arise. Those who criticise it or argue for an arbitrary time-based reconsideration mechanism seem 
to be driven by a shallow and intellectually weak political agenda, rather than a genuine and well 
considered recommendation to improve the existing system to create a next generation regulator. 
CropLife and our members have constructively engaged for years in all the previous reform 
agendas and proposed specific initiatives to improve the system, both in its effectiveness and its 
efficiency. Despite our frustration with the slow process and lack of proper implementation of these 
reforms, we remain committed to continuing to work constructively with the Government to ensure 
Australia has the world’s best agricultural chemical regulator. 
The importance of this regulator maintaining its technical competencies whilst significantly 
improving efficiencies is crucial to the plant science industry and the nation’s farming sector.

S U B M I S S I O N O N T H E R E V I E W OF A G R I C U L T U R A L A N D V E T E R I N A R Y C H E MI C A L S L E G I S L A T I O N A M E N D M E N T A C T 2 0 1 3 
14 
APPENDIX 1: 
THE PLANT SCIENCE INDUSTRY 
CropLife member companies are the innovators, developers, manufacturers and formulators of 
chemical and biological crop protection products, and agricultural biotechnologies for plant 
breeding, such as genetically modified crops.   
The plant science industry’s crop protection products include fungicides, herbicides and insecticides 
critical to maintaining and improving Australia’s agricultural productivity to meet future global food 
security challenges. Each of these products is rigorously assessed by the Australian Pesticides and 
Veterinary Medicines Authority (APVMA) to ensure they present no unacceptable risk to users, 
consumers, the environment and the trade of agricultural produce.  
In 1995 it took the assessment of 52,500 compounds to develop one effective crop protection 
chemical active constituent. It now requires the assessment of more than 140,000 compounds and 
expenditure of more than $400 million over an 11-year period to bring just one successful crop 
protection product to the market. More than one-third of this cost directly relates to compliance with 
regulation and registration requirements. Without access to these tools, farmers could lose as much 
as 50 per cent of their annual production to pests, weeds and diseases. A Deloitte Access 
Economics report released in 2018, ‘Economic activity attributable to crop protection products’, 
estimates that up to $20.6 billion of Australian agricultural output (or 73 per cent of the total value 
of crop production) is attributable to the use of crop protection products.7 
Consumer safety is CropLife and our members’ highest priority. We recognise the importance of 
gaining and maintaining community trust in our role in the food production supply chain. CropLife 
and its members are committed to the stewardship of their products throughout their lifecycle 
ensuring human health and safety, and the responsible and sustainable management of the 
environment and trade issues associated with agricultural chemical use in Australia. CropLife 
ensures the responsible use of these products through its mandatory industry code of conduct and 
has set a benchmark for industry stewardship through programs such as drumMUSTER, 
ChemClear® and safety training programs run by CropLife’s wholly-owned stewardship and safety 
organisation, Agsafe. 
Crop protection products are crucial to modern integrated pest management techniques and 
systems used by farmers. Access to fewer crop protection tools would facilitate faster development 
of resistance among targeted pests, diminishing the efficacy of remaining chemical options. The 
economic impact of weeds alone is estimated to be over $4.8 billion each year, or $13 million per 
day.8 
The current regulatory system for agricultural chemicals in Australia is scientifically competent, 
technically proficient and globally recognised. CropLife’s only concerns with the current system 
relate to the APVMA’s ability to regulate agricultural chemicals more efficiently. It is imperative that 
the regulation of crop protection products in Australia is efficient and effective to ensure Australian 
farmers have access to the innovative tools the plant science industry provides. This will improve 
the ability of Australian farmers to be internationally competitive and productive. 
7
8
https://www.croplife.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/Deloitte-Access-Economics-Economic-Activity-
Attributable-to-Crop-Protection-Products_web.pdf  
https://invasives.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2019/01/Cost-of-weeds-report.pdf