1 
The VMDA is a peak body representing the largest group of registrants and 
manufacturers of animal health products, as well as other key industry 
participants.  We have as our key platform the support and development of local 
industry, including manufacturing and export. 
The VMDA supports the objects of the Agvet Code, including those that require the 
APVMA to take into account best practice scientific principles and the health and safety of 
human beings, animals and the environment, in the regulatory process. 
We note also that the Agvet Code recognises that the furthering of trade and commerce 
between Australia and places outside of Australia, the viability and competitiveness of 
primary industry, and a viable domestic industry for manufacturing chemical products, are 
essential for the well-being of the economy.  
The Agvet Code further states that this requires a system for regulating chemical products 
and their constituents that is cost effective, efficient, predictable, adaptive and 
responsive, and that the implementation of the Code is to be in a manner that balances 
regulatory effort and any burden imposed on holders of approvals, registrations and the 
domestic industry. 
The VMDA urges the Government, APVMA and others providing input to the regulatory 
process to take particular note of all of the objects of the Agvet Code, and the need for a 
clear, predictable, cooperative and non-adversarial approach to agvet chemical 
regulation. 
We hereby present our submission for consideration. 
J D Adams 
Executive Director 
Tel:  0447 715 515 
E:  jdadams124@gmail.com

2 
Executive Summary: 
The VMDA broadly supports the concept of improving the Operational Efficiency of the 
APVMA, in particular where this improvement is related to providing further clarity and 
certainty of timelines and outcomes for applicants. 
We welcome the adoption of an approach to the handling of confidential commercial 
information (CCI) that allows the APVMA staff to carry out their duties with confidence, 
however we continue to protest the failure of the APVMA to take account of and operate 
under, the direction of the Federal Court of Australia in the matter of ABBEY 
LABORATORIES PTY LTD and AUSTRALIAN PESTICIDES AND VETERINARY MEDICINES 
AUTHORITY, heard on February 1st, 2016 with judgment handed down on June 10, 2016.  
While the proposed legislative change appears to assuage the concerns of some APVMA 
staff, this could have been achieved without legislative change by means of a clear and 
concise direction from senior APVMA management, based upon the judgment of Rares J 
as above.  A different approach would have avoided the consequent costs to industry 
which amount to many millions of dollars, with ongoing costs to the farming community 
as yet unable even to be calculated. 
The VMDA supports proposals 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, and 10.   
The VMDA partially supports proposal 3 but disagrees with one aspect (see submission 
below). 
The VMDA does not support proposals 7, 8, and 9. 
While the VMDA commends the overall aims of the proposed legislative amendments in 
terms of improving operational efficiency, we urge the Government to take into account 
the comments and suggestions of industry as to the apparently unforeseen consequences 
of some of the proposals and the associated construction of the legislative proposals.

3 
Proposal 1:  Clarifying confidential commercial information provisions: 
The VMDA supports this proposal while noting our comments as above regarding the 
Federal Court Case.  It is incumbent upon this (and any other) regulator to ensure that 
they take appropriate steps to consult with industry on major issues such as CCI, and to 
take steps to ensure that such momentous decisions are carefully considered especially in 
the face of such overwhelming evidence to the contrary as was the case with the CCI 
issue. 
Proposal 2:  Simplifying reporting requirements for annual returns: 
The VMDA supports this proposal.  We have for many years pointed out the inaccuracies 
of the reporting of active constituent quantities because of the inability to gain access to 
details of the quantities of raw materials imported, as well as to gain access to the same 
figures for exports.  We accept that there is a need to provide some degree of 
information, and support this proposal as a practical means of providing the information 
without imposing on industry a complex and unwieldy system that is, in the end, 
inaccurate. 
Proposal 3:  Increase the APVMA’s flexibility to manage minor errors in applications at 
preliminary assessment. 
The VMDA broadly supports the proposal to enable the correction of minor errors or 
omissions within a reasonable time.  However we do not support the added element of 
‘refusal’ if the APVMA is ‘not satisfied that the defects in the application can reasonably 
be rectified;’ 
It is quite possible that an APVMA assessor would ‘believe’ incorrectly that a particular 
defect could not ‘reasonably be rectified’ when in fact it could be.  The APVMA cannot 
know what resources or information the applicant has on hand or has access to that may 
rectify any defect regardless of how ‘major’ it may appear to the APVMA assessor at 
Preliminary Assessment. 
The VMDA suggest that these provisions be deleted from the proposed legislative changes 
OR that the following wording be substituted: 
‘The APVMA may refuse the application if it is not satisfied after consultation with the 
applicant that the application can reasonably be rectified.’

4 
Proposal 4:  APVMA amendment of the relevant particulars or conditions in a variation 
application. 
Proposal 5:  Timeframe for notifying Good Standards Australia New Zealand (FSANZ) 
about variations to the Maximum Residue Limit Standard. 
Proposal 6:  Enable a person to apply to vary the particulars of a label approval that is 
suspended. 
Proposal 7:  Amend the definition of ‘expiry date’. 
Changing the date format to “date” rather than “month and year” reduces clarity in the 
legislation and seems to imply that a full date (dd-mm-yyyy) would be required to be 
printed. This would be problematic for very small containers where there is insufficient 
room for a full date. Current label artwork is designed around the required space to fit 
month and year only, and any changes to the space requirements for expiry date would 
have an impact on many labels. It would take time for new labels to be designed, printed 
and phased in, whereas the proposal is for the amendment to commence with immediate 
effect. 
A change from ‘month and year’ to absolute date would also potentially: 
a) Confuse consumers who would believe that the product is absolutely ineffective as  
b) Reduce the shelf life of a product by up to a month if for instance the date of 
labelling/release were to be the 1st of any given month rather than the product 
being ‘effective’ for the whole of the month. 
Additionally, the change in definition of expiry date from “should not” to “must not” may 
present legal issues for veterinarians, who currently will allow a product to be used “at” 
expiry, sometimes by increasing the dose in an educated manner.  This is potentially in 
conflict with the veterinarian’s ‘right to prescribe’. 
Scientifically, given that the APVMA has recently asserted that it ‘may require’ shelf life 
data to extend for 3 months beyond the proposed period, therefore reducing ‘statutory’ 
shelf life for products that have already completed their stability testing, there is no 
justification for applying a specific date for expiry.

5 
Proposal 8:  Add antimicrobial resistance as a specific safety consideration. 
The VMDA does not support this proposal in its current form. 
We recognise that measures should be implemented to reduce and prevent the spread of 
antimicrobial resistance, however the question of ‘the potential for human exposure to 
antimicrobial resistant microorganisms resulting, directly or indirectly, from the use of the 
constituent’ is a complex issue.  While we support the concept, inclusion in the legislation 
as a specific safety consideration to which APVMA must have regard is premature. Given 
the current pressures within APVMA, it is unlikely that they will be sufficiently resourced 
to consider how to best implement the proposal, and develop appropriate guidance 
material for applicants, within the proposed 6 month timeframe.  Further, the VMDA 
would like to se a formal period of consultation with industry via expert scientific opinion 
from both sides and internationally before adoption of such a measure. 
A better approach may be for APVMA to develop a specific strategy on antimicrobials, 
similar to EMA CVMP’s 2016-2020 strategy. This would permit greater flexibility to assess 
and address the areas of concern, and allow more time to develop and implement 
considered measures over a longer period. 
Proposal 9:  Including civil penalty provisions for false or misleading information. 
These criteria are already covered by Competition and Consumer Act 2010 Schedule 2, 
Section 18. Additional provisions in the AgVet Code may lead to additional complication 
and confusion, and potentially result in different outcomes under the two Acts. 
Proposal 10:  Minor technical amendments to the Administration Act and Agvet Code. 
End.