The Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry manages 8 Japan quotas including edible bovine offal. These quotas were put in place by the Japan–Australia Economic Partnership Agreement (JAEPA).
Australian exporters can export specific quantities of edible bovine offal products at reduced tariff rates through this quota. Access to the quota is on a first-come, first-served (FCFS) basis until the available quota amount has been exhausted.
Tariff rate cuts under this quota vary depending on the product being exported. Exporters can use the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade tariff portal to find the current tariff rate applying to their product and to compare the tariff reduction received under both the JAEPA and the CPTPP agreements, or see this table outlining quota changes under the TPP.
 
Key dates to remember
- 10 March—Department accepts applications for the new quota year
- 1 April—New quota year commences
- 31 March—Quota year ends
The quota usage tables show the total quantity of quota used by Australia for JAEPA products. The tables are updated regularly.
To apply for a quota certificate for a consignment of bovine offal, an exporter must lodge a request for permit (RFP) through the department’s electronic documentation system, EXDOC.
The RFP must include the correct AHECC codes and the quota indicator must be ticked. The quota certificate will be emailed to the address stored for the exporter in the EXDOC system. Exporters can update their details by contacting the EXDOC Help Desk.
To complete the RFP exporters may need to refer to the eligible AHECC codes.
When the RFP reaches ‘complete’ status in EXDOC, the data will go through to the Quota Unit. Once the application is approved, the Quota Unit will email the quota certificate directly to the exporter.
JAEPA certificates cannot be amended so if an amendment is made to a bovine offal RFP that changes the exporter, importer, product type or quantity of product the original certificate will be cancelled and a new certificate will be issued and emailed.
Note: Quota administration is cost recovered on a per certificate basis in accordance with the Export Charges (Imposition-General) Regulation 2021 and the Export Control (Fees and Payments) Rules 2021. Exporters are invoiced monthly for any quota certificates issued. The current cost recovered amount is $36 per certificate issued.
There are a number of offal products which do not qualify for quota. Japanese authorities have advised that some bovine offal products can enter Japan tariff-free and do not need a quota certificate.
Tongues and internal organs can enter Japan at a lower tariff-rate under the Trans-Pacific Partnership as of 30 December 2018.
Tripe, intestines and rumen pillars can enter Japan at a zero tariff-rate under the applicable 0504xxxx AHECC code.
Animal fat (unattached to meat) is not included under quota and should be entered into EXDOC using the relevant 15xxxxxx AHECC code.
Animal blood is not included under quota and should be entered into EXDOC using the relevant 0511xxxx or 3002xxxx AHECC code.
Additionally, meat and meat offal that is not fit for human consumption is not eligible for quota to Japan (0511xxxx AHECC code).
The Export Control (Tariff Rate Quotas-General) Rules 2021 govern the rules around quota for bovine offal to Japan. Exporters should be familiar with the rules.
JAEPA eliminates or reduces barriers to trade in goods between Japan and Australia. JAEPA entered into force on 15 January 2015. More information on the broader outcomes of the agreement can be found on the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade’s website.
The Quota Unit collects and manages the data presented on this website for commercial and government use. The data comes from the request for permits (RFPs) received by the department.
Contact us
For queries or assistance with the JAEPA bovine offal quota, contact the Quota Unit:
Phone: 02 6272 4068
Email: quota.admin@awe.gov.au