The Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment manages 8 Japan quotas, including pork. These quotas were put in place by the Japan–Australia Economic Partnership Agreement (JAEPA).
Australian exporters can export up to 14,000 tonnes of pork products at reduced tariff rates through this quota. Access to the quota is on a first-come first-served (FCFS) basis until the available quota amount has been exhausted.
Tariff rate cuts under this quota vary depending on the product being exported. Exporters can use the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade tariff portal to find the current tariff rate applying to their product and to compare the tariff reduction received under both the JAEPA and the CPTPP agreements.
Key dates to remember
- 10 March—Department accepts applications for the new quota year
- 1 April—New quota year commences
- 31 March—Quota year ends
Current quota usage
The quota usage tables show the total quantity of quota used by Australia for JAEPA products. The tables are updated regularly.
Apply for a JAEPA quota certificate for pork
To apply for a quota certificate for a consignment of pork, an exporter must lodge a request for permit (RFP) through the department’s electronic documentation system, EXDOC.
The RFP must include the correct AHECC codes and the quota indicator must be ticked. The quota certificate will be emailed to the address stored for the exporter in the EXDOC system. Exporters can update their details by contacting the EXDOC Help Desk.
To complete the RFP exporters may need to refer to the eligible AHECC codes.
When the RFP reaches ‘complete’ status in EXDOC, the data will go through to the Quota Unit. Once the application is approved, the Quota Unit will email the quota certificate directly to the exporter.
JAEPA certificates cannot be amended so if an amendment is made to a pork RFP that changes the exporter, importer, product type or quantity of product the original certificate will be cancelled and a new certificate will be issued and emailed.
Note: Quota administration is cost recovered on a per certificate basis in accordance with the Export Charges (Imposition-General) Regulation 2021 and the Export Control (Fees and Payments) Rules 2021. Exporters are invoiced monthly for any quota certificates issued. The current cost recovered amount is $36 per certificate issued
Historical quota usage
Legislation
The Export Control (Tariff Rate Quotas-General) Rules 2021 governs the rules around quota for pork to Japan. Exporters should be familiar with these rules
Background to JAEPA
JAEPA eliminates or reduces barriers to trade in goods between Japan and Australia. JAEPA entered into force on 15 January 2015. More information on the broader outcomes of the agreement can be found on the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade’s website.
Data collection
The Quota Unit collects and manages the data presented on this website for commercial and government use. The data comes from the request for permits (RFPs) received by the department.
Contact us
Get updates about Japan quotas directly by joining our subscription list. Simply email the Quota Unit with your name and the word ‘subscribe’ in the heading.
For queries or assistance with the JAEPA pork quota, contact the Quota Unit:
Phone: 02 6272 4068
Email: quota.admin@awe.gov.au