Carbon EDGE training (MLA)

Carbon EDGE is a 2-day MLA training program for the red meat industry, providing participants with an understanding of the opportunities for emissions reduction and carbon storage activities in a livestock grazing business. Participants use their own information to develop an action plan for their business as they learn about the practices and technologies that could reduce their carbon footprint and improve sustainability and productivity.

On-Farm Carbon Advice (New South Wales Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development)

The New South Wales Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development’s On-Farm Carbon Advice project provides advice on carbon farming practices in extensive beef, sheep, dairy, and mixed farming systems. It covers topics including understanding climate change, agricultural emissions, emissions reduction and carbon storage strategies, and pros and cons of carbon farming.

Farm Business Resilience Plan – planning template (Business Queensland)

Business Queensland’s Farm Business Resilience Plan provides templates and advice for writing a plan, including identifying opportunities to support and improve your business’ productivity and profitability.

Calculating net emissions and reduction strategies for a broadacre farming (Grains Research and Development Corporation)

This article Carbon Neutral Grain Farming by 2050 – an example in calculating net emissions for a broadacre farm and strategies to reduce net emissions on the Grains Research and Development Corporation website looks at calculating emissions for a broadacre farm and ways those emissions might be reduced.

Environmental Economic Accounting Dashboard

The Environmental Economic Accounting Dashboard administered by DCCEEW lets users explore, visualise and customise content from various government databases. The content is presented as account tables, charts, customisable stories and underlying spatial data maps. Users can answer questions like ‘How is our land cover changing over time in a particular state or territory?’ and ‘What is the economic value of mangroves for a particular stretch of coastline?’

Co-Benefits Standards - Western Australian Carbon Farming and Land Restoration Program (Western Australia Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development)

The Co-Benefits Standard 2022-2023 (PDF 1 MB) provides guidance and resources for the Western Australian Carbon Farming and Land Restoration Program. It addresses monitoring and reporting for 5 co-benefits: biodiversity and conservation, agricultural productivity, soil health, salinity mitigation and Aboriginal economic and cultural wellbeing. The program’s Co-Benefits Information Portal allows applicants to assess co-benefits for any particular area or location.

Indigenous Carbon Project Guide (Indigenous Carbon Industry Network)

The Indigenous Carbon Industry Network’s 2022 Indigenous Carbon Project Guide (PDF 8.5 MB) aims to ensure that First Nations groups are well-informed to position themselves to maximise the benefits from carbon projects for their country and community. It covers 13 topics, including what is the carbon market; free, prior and informed consent; project feasibility; project governance; First Nations rights and interests; understanding co-benefits; and keeping your story strong. The guide can be downloaded as a whole or for relevant areas of interest.

Land Restoration Fund Co-benefits Standard (Queensland Government)

The Land Restoration Fund Co-benefits Standard (PDF 2.1 MB) is focused on growing the carbon farming industry by supporting carbon projects that deliver priority co-benefits for Queensland. This document is the framework that specifies how co-benefits generated from a carbon project are to be measured, reported, and verified for the purposes of the Land Restoration Fund.