Wood Rules changes
Changes have been made to the Export Control (Wood and Woodchips Rules) 2021 and exporters will need to consider the new requirements.
The consideration period for wood export licence applications has been extended from 30 to 60 days. We recommend that you apply for a wood export licence a minimum of 60 days before your intended shipping date.
Wood processed into its final form domestically, that will not be further processed once exported, does not require a wood export licence. Such wood products include utility poles, railway sleepers and large structural beams.
An information sheet on the improvements to the Export Control (Wood and Woodchips) Rules 2021 is also available.
If you are exporting prescribed wood and woodchips, please ensure you have completed the Fit and Proper Person requirements and apply for a wood export licence using the latest wood export application form.
The Export Control Act 2020, and the Export Control (Wood and Woodchips Rules) 2021 that fall under this Act requires that an exporter holds an export licence for the export of two tonnes or more of prescribed wood and woodchips.
The following are prescribed goods and require a wood export licence for the purposes of the Act:
- woodchips
- wood in the round
- wood with a cross-sectional area of at least 225 square centimetres
Prescribed goods will be prohibited from export unless they comply with prescribed export requirements and conditions.
- If wood or woodchips are sourced from an area covered by a Regional Forest Agreement (RFA)and meet the definition of RFA Wood in section 4 of the Regional Forest Agreements Act 2002.
- If wood or woodchips are derived from trees harvested outside Australian territory, including those transiting through Australia.
- If the wood has been processed into its final, end-use form, and will not undergo any further processing after export.
- If wood or woodchips are sourced from a plantation in a state for which there is an approved code of practice.
- If the wood or woodchips are shipped in a consignment of less than 2 tonnes.
Some forest products may require an inspection for which a phytosanitary certificate or other government certificate is required by an importing country. It is your responsibility as an exporter to find out the importing country’s requirements prior to export. For further information regarding phytosanitary certificates or importing country requirements, please visit the Exporting Plants and Plant Products page.
For further guidelines on illegal logging laws overseas, visit the Exporters of wood and wood fibre products page. This includes information on how to apply for a government certificate for the export of timber or timber products to Indonesia.
Important Changes
From 1 May 2025, we require that applicants or holders of a wood export licence be considered a fit and proper person (FPP).
Applicants for and holders of a wood export licence should complete the FPP Questionnaire to enable us to assess whether they are a fit and proper person. Completed FPP Questionnaires should be provided to the Export Licence Officer. Further information about this process is provided below.
Wood Export Application Requirements
To apply for a wood export licence, please supply us with the following documents:
- A completed wood export licence application form. This includes a declaration that the wood or woodchips intended for export have been harvested in compliance with Australian Government and state environmental requirements. This form also includes an acknowledgement that you have submitted a Fit and Proper Person Questionnaire.
- Copies of all relevant state government-issued documentation that authorises the harvest and sale of the wood (such as harvesting licences, clearing licences and sales permits). This is required as evidence that the wood has been legally harvested.
- A copy of documentation relating to the overseas purchase (for example, a sales receipt, a confirmation of order, a letter of intent to buy or a tax invoice).
Applications and supporting documentation can be sent via email. Please retain your original signed application.
We have a legislated 60-day consideration period for assessing a wood export licence application. We strongly recommend that you apply for a wood export licence a minimum 60 days before your intended shipping date.
If all the required documentation is not provided or the application is incomplete, your application cannot be processed.
Background
The Export Control Act 2020 and the Export Control (Wood and Woodchips Rules) 2021 require an applicant or holder of a wood export licence to be a fit and proper person (FPP). This is done by satisfying the FPP test.
The FPP test in the Export Control Act 2020 allows our Secretary (or delegate of the Secretary) to decide whether a person or company is of a trustworthy nature and demonstrates the personal integrity to uphold Australia’s trading reputation.
Requirements
The FPP test involves the annual completion of a FPP Questionnaire sent to the Export Licence Officer which will be used to assist in assessing whether the FPP test is met. We aim to finalise assessments against the FPP Test within 60 days and recommend you lodge your FPP Questionnaire a minimum of 60 days before an intended shipping date.
An annual FPP test is required for all exporters, regardless of previously lodged FFP tests.
A FPP Questionnaire (Modification to persons in control) must be lodged if any details from the original FPP Questionnaire have changed. We also recommend you lodge your FPP (Modification to persons in control) a minimum of 60 days before an intended shipping date.
Further information of the FPP test can be found at the Understanding the fit and proper person test webpage.
Important Information
It is essential when you are making an application that you ensure all the information you supply is up-to-date, correct and complete. You must also notify us of key business or personnel changes.
It is an offence to make a false statement and this can also impact your eligibility as a FPP.
Our Secretary (or delegate of the Secretary) may refuse a wood export licence application or revoke a wood export licence if it is found the person does not meet the FPP Test.
The export licences we issue are not the same as harvesting and selling licences issued by a state government. We have no involvement in state-issued licences but do require an exporter to have this documentation to be granted a wood export licence.
You must contact the relevant state authority for further information.
If you are unsure which state authority is relevant for your export, please contact the Export Licence Officer.
Downloads
Accessible versions of these documents are pending, in the interim please email wood.export@aff.gov.au for assistance.
Information Sheet: Improvements to the Export Control (Wood and Woodchips) Rules 2021 (PDF 192 KB)
Information Sheet: Improvements to the Export Control (Wood and Woodchips) Rules 2021 (DOCX 231 KB)
If you have difficulty accessing these files, visit web accessibility for assistance.
Questions and answers – General
The Export Control Act 2020 has a number of regulations covering wood export licensing:
- Sets out the overarching legislative framework for the regulation of exported goods, including food and agricultural products, from Australian territory.
- Details the requirements and establishes conditions relating to the export of prescribed wood and woodchips.
There is no cost for a licence.
The legislated period for a wood export licence application is 60 days, which starts the day after we receive a complete application.
We recommend submitting your wood export licence application a minimum 60 days before your shipment date. This allows enough time for us to complete the assessment, which can take up to 60 days to complete.
We aim to finalise assessments against the FPP Test within 60 days. However, this may take longer depending on the circumstances.
The FPP test is a requirement under section 6-2A of the Export Control (Wood and Woodchips) Rules 2021. The requirements of the FPP Test are outlined in section 372 of the Export Control Act 2020.
Further information of the FPP test can be found on the Understanding the fit and proper person test webpage.
This assists us to understand the intended purpose and market of the wood being exported.
Examples of acceptable documentation may be a sales receipt, a confirmation of order, a letter of intent to buy or a tax invoice.
Applications and documentation can be sent via email: wood.export@aff.gov.au.
Please retain your original signed application. Our Secretary (or delegate of the Secretary) may request the original signed documents or require you to retain the original documents for a specified period.
Illegal logging reporting
Call 1800 803 006
See Report Illegal Logging
Email Operational Intelligence and Coordination Branch