We completed a review of the Harvest Strategy Policy and the Bycatch Policy in 2026.
The Commonwealth Fisheries Harvest Strategy Policy (Harvest Strategy Policy) and associated implementation guidelines aim to ensure key commercial fish species are managed for long–term biological sustainability and to maximise the net economic returns to the Australian community. The policy also seeks to provide the fishing industry with a more certain operating environment.
The Harvest Strategy Policy provides a framework that allows a precautionary, evidence–based approach to setting total allowable catch levels in all Commonwealth fisheries on a fishery by fishery basis, to ensure that fisheries provide maximum economic returns while maintaining stocks at sustainable levels. The implementation guidelines provide practical advice on how to interpret and apply the Harvest Strategy Policy to Australia’s fisheries and contain details of the science behind the fisheries management decisions.
The Harvest Strategy Policy includes provisions for review five years after commencement.
History of the Harvest Strategy Policy
In December 2005, the Australian Government Minister for Fisheries, Forestry and Conservation issued a ministerial direction to the Australian Fisheries Management Authority (AFMA) under section 91 of the Fisheries Administration Act 1991. The ministerial direction included a requirement for the development of a world's best practice harvest strategy policy for Commonwealth fisheries.
In September 2007 the Australian Government released the ‘Commonwealth Fisheries Harvest Strategy Policy and Guidelines’. AFMA has developed harvest strategies consistent with the policy in all major Commonwealth fisheries.
Following a review of the Harvest Strategy Policy and Guidelines in 2013 the Harvest Strategy Policy and its associated implementation guidelines were revised to capture new developments in fisheries management and science.
The revised policy was subject to public consultation in 2017. The department also held consultation workshops with targeted stakeholders (scientists, industry, recreational fishers and environmental non-government organisations) on the policies and guidelines.
The revised policy and guidelines were released on 21 November 2018.
A second review of the Harvest Strategy Policy, including stakeholder consultation, was completed in 2026. The department is now working to revise the policy based on the review’s conclusions.